Fig. 7: High-level overview of GPT pretraining, and fine-tuning
steps. Courtesy of OpenAI.
regressions on public NLP datasets.
The most important milestone of LLM development is the
launch of ChatGPT (Chat Generative Pre-trained Transformer)
[60] on November 30, 2022. ChatGPT is chatbot that enables
users to steer a conversation to complete a wide range of
tasks such as question answering, information seeking, text
summarization, and more. ChatGPT is powered by GPT-3.5
(and later by GPT-4), a sibling model to InstructGPT, which
is trained to follow an instruction in a prompt and provide a
detailed response.
GPT-4 [33] is the latest and most powerful LLM in the
GPT family. Launched in March, 2023, GPT-4 is a multi-
modal LLM in that it can take image and text as inputs and
produce text outputs. While still less capable than humans
in some of the most challenging real-world scenarios, GPT-4
exhibits human-level performance on various professional and
academic benchmarks, including passing a simulated bar exam
with a score around the top 10% of test takers, as shown in
Fig 11. Like early GPT models, GPT-4 was first pre-trained to
predict next tokens on large text corpora, and then fine-tuned
with RLHF to align model behaviors with human-desired ones.
2) The LLaMA F amily: LLaMA is a collection of founda-
tion language models, released by Meta. Unlike GPT models,
LLaMA models are open-source, i.e., model weights are
released to the research community under a noncommercial
license. Thus, the LLaMA family grows rapidly as these
models are widely used by many research groups to develop
better open-source LLMs to compete the closed-source ones or
to develop task-specific LLMs for mission-critical applications.
The first set of LLaMA models [32] was released in Febru-
ary 2023, ranging from 7B to 65B parameters. These models
are pre-trained on trillions of tokens, collected from publicly
available datasets. LLaMA uses the transformer architecture of
GPT-3, with a few minor architectural modifications, including
(1) using a SwiGLU activation function instead of ReLU,
(2) using rotary positional embeddings instead of absolute
positional embedding, and (3) using root-mean-squared layer-
normalization instead of standard layer-normalization. The
open-source LLaMA-13B model outperforms the proprietary
GPT-3 (175B) model on most benchmarks, making it a good
baseline for LLM research.
In July 2023, Meta, in partnership with Microsoft, released
the LLaMA-2 collection [61], which include both foundation
language models and Chat models finetuned for dialog, known
as LLaMA-2 Chat. The LLaMA-2 Chat models were reported
to outperform other open-source models on many public
benchmarks. Fig 12 shows the training process of LLaMA-2
Chat. The process begins with pre-training LLaMA-2 using
publicly available online data. Then, an initial version of
LLaMA-2 Chat is built via supervised fine-tuning. Subse-
quently, the model is iteratively refined using RLHF, rejection
sampling and proximal policy optimization. In the RLHF stage,
the accumulation of human feedback for revising the reward
model is crucial to prevent the reward model from being
changed too much, which could hurt the stability of LLaMA
model training.
Alpaca [62] is fine-tuned from the LLaMA-7B model using
52K instruction-following demonstrations generated in the
style of self-instruct using GPT-3.5 (text-davinci-003). Alpaca
is very cost-effective for training, especially for academic
research. On the self-instruct evaluation set, Alpaca performs
similarly to GPT-3.5, despite that Alpaca is much smaller.
The Vicuna team has developed a 13B chat model, Vicuna-
13B, by fine-tuning LLaMA on user-shared conversations
collected from ShareGPT. Preliminary evaluation using GPT-
4 as a evaluator shows that Vicuna-13B achieves more than
90% quality of OpenAI’s ChatGPT, and Google’s Bard while
outperforming other models like LLaMA and Stanford Alpaca
in more than 90% of cases. 13 shows the relative response
quality of Vicuna and a few other well-known models by
GPT-4. Another advantage of Vicuna-13B is its relative limited
computational demand for model training. The training cost of
Vicuna-13B is merely $300.
Like Alpaca and Vicuna, the Guanaco models [63] are also
finetuned LLaMA models using instruction-following data. But
the finetuning is done very efficiently using QLoRA such
that finetuning a 65B parameter model can be done on a
single 48GB GPU. QLoRA back-propagates gradients through
a frozen, 4-bit quantized pre-trained language model into Low
Rank Adapters (LoRA). The best Guanaco model outperforms
all previously released models on the Vicuna benchmark,
reaching 99.3% of the performance level of ChatGPT while
only requiring 24 hours of fine-tuning on a single GPU.
Koala [64] is yet another instruction-following language
model built on LLaMA, but with a specific focus on interaction
data that include user inputs and responses generated by highly
capable closed-source chat models such as ChatGPT. The
Koala-13B model performs competitively with state-of-the-art
chat models according to human evaluation based on real-
world user prompts.
Mistral-7B [65] is a 7B-parameter language model engi-
neered for superior performance and efficiency. Mistral-7B
outperforms the best open-source 13B model (LLaMA-2-13B)
across all evaluated benchmarks, and the best open-source
34B model (LLaMA-34B) in reasoning, mathematics, and code
generation. This model leverages grouped-query attention for
faster inference, coupled with sliding window attention to
effectively handle sequences of arbitrary length with a reduced
inference cost.
The LLaMA family is growing rapidly, as more instruction-
following models have been built on LLaMA or LLaMA-
2, including Code LLaMA [66], Gorilla [67], Giraffe [68],