share with researchers. The OPT models’ parameters are
shown in 20
Fig. 20: Different OPT Models’ architecture details. Courtesy
of [86].
Chinchilla: In [2], Hoffmann et al. investigated the optimal
model size and number of tokens for training a transformer
language model under a given compute budget. By training
over 400 language models ranging from 70 million to over
16 billion parameters on 5 to 500 billion tokens, they found
that for compute-optimal training, the model size and the
number of training tokens should be scaled equally: for every
doubling of model size the number of training tokens should
also be doubled. They tested this hypothesis by training a
predicted compute-optimal model, Chinchilla, that uses the
same compute budget as Gopher but with 70B parameters and
4% more more data.
Galactica: In [87], Taylor et al. introduced Galactica, a
large language model that can store, combine and reason about
scientific knowledge. They trained on a large scientific corpus
of papers, reference material, knowledge bases and many other
sources. Galactica performed well on reasoning, outperforming
Chinchilla on mathematical MMLU by 41.3% to 35.7%, and
PaLM 540B on MATH with a score of 20.4% versus 8.8%.
CodeGen: In [88], Nijkamp et al. trained and released
a family of large language models up to 16.1B parameters,
called CODEGEN, on natural language and programming
language data, and open sourced the training library JAX-
FORMER. They showed the utility of the trained model by
demonstrating that it is competitive with the previous state-of-
the-art on zero-shot Python code generation on HumanEval.
They further investigated the multi-step paradigm for program
synthesis, where a single program is factorized into multi-
ple prompts specifying sub-problems. They also constructed
an open benchmark, Multi-Turn Programming Benchmark
(MTPB), consisting of 115 diverse problem sets that are
factorized into multi-turn prompts.
AlexaTM: In [89], Soltan et al. demonstrated that mul-
tilingual large-scale sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models,
pre-trained on a mixture of denoising and Causal Language
Modeling (CLM) tasks, are more efficient few-shot learners
than decoder-only models on various task. They trained a
20 billion parameter multilingual seq2seq model called Alexa
Teacher Model (AlexaTM 20B) and showed that it achieves
state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on 1-shot summarization
tasks, outperforming a much larger 540B PaLM decoder
model. AlexaTM consist of 46 encoder layers, 32 decoder
layers, 32 attention heads, and dmodel = 4096.
Sparrow: In [90], Glaese et al. presented Sparrow, an
information-seeking dialogue agent trained to be more helpful,
correct, and harmless compared to prompted language model
baselines. They used reinforcement learning from human feed-
back to train their models with two new additions to help
human raters judge agent behaviour. The high-level pipeline
of Sparrow model is shown in Fig 21.
Fig. 21: Sparrow pipeline relies on human participation to
continually expand a training set. Courtesy of [90].
Minerva: In [91], Lewkowycz et al. introduced Minerva,
a large language model pretrained on general natural language
data and further trained on technical content, to tackle previous
LLM struggle with quantitative reasoning (such as solving
mathematics, science, and engineering problems).
MoD: In [92], Tay et al. presented a generalized and
unified perspective for self-supervision in NLP and show how
different pre-training objectives can be cast as one another
and how interpolating between different objectives can be
effective. They proposed Mixture-of-Denoisers (MoD), a pre-
training objective that combines diverse pre-training paradigms
together. This framework is known as Unifying Language
Learning (UL2). An overview of UL2 pretraining paradigm
is shown in Fig 21.
Fig. 22: An overview of UL2 pretraining paradigm. Courtesy
of [92].
BLOOM: In [93], Scao et al. presented BLOOM, a 176B-
parameter open-access language model designed and built
thanks to a collaboration of hundreds of researchers. BLOOM
is a decoder-only Transformer language model trained on the
ROOTS corpus, a dataset comprising hundreds of sources in
46 natural and 13 programming languages (59 in total). An
overview of BLOOM architecture is shown in Fig 23.