2) WordPieceEncoding: This algorithm is mainly used for
very well-known models such as BERT and Electra. At the
beginning of training, the algorithm takes all the alphabet from
the training data to make sure that nothing will be left as UNK
or unknown from the training dataset. This case happens when
the model is given an input that can not be tokenized by the
tokenizer. It mostly happens in cases where some characters are
not tokenizable by it. Similar to BytePairEncoding, it tries to
maximize the likelihood of putting all the tokens in vocabulary
based on their frequency.
3) SentencePieceEncoding: Although both tokenizers de-
scribed before are strong and have many advantages compared
to white-space tokenization, they still take assumption of
words being always separated by white-space as granted. This
assumption is not always true, in fact in some languages, words
can be corrupted by many noisy elements such as unwanted
spaces or even invented words. SentencePieceEncoding tries
to address this issue.
D. Positional Encoding
1) Absolute Positional Embeddings : (APE) [44] has been
used in the original Transformer model to preserve the infor-
mation of sequence order. Therefore, the positional information
of words is added to the input embeddings at the bottom of
both the encoder and decoder stacks. There are various options
for positional encodings, either learned or fixed. In the vanilla
Transformer, sine and cosine functions are employed for this
purpose. The main drawback of using APE in Transformers
is the restriction to a certain number of tokens. Additionally,
APE fails to account for the relative distances between tokens.
2) Relative Positional Embeddings : (RPE) [126] involves
extending self-attention to take into account the pairwise links
between input elements. RPE is added to the model at two
levels: first as an additional component to the keys, and
subsequently as a sub-component of the values matrix. This
approach looks at the input as a fully-connected graph with
labels and directed edges. In the case of linear sequences, edges
can capture information about the relative position differences
between input elements. A clipping distance, represented as k
2 ≤ k ≤ n − 4, specifies the maximum limit on relative lo-
cations. This allows the model to make reasonable predictions
for sequence lengths that are not part of the training data.
3) Rotary Position Embeddings : Rotary Positional Em-
bedding (RoPE) [127] tackles problems with existing ap-
proaches. Learned absolute positional encodings can lack gen-
eralizability and meaningfulness, particularly when sentences
are short. Moreover, current methods like T5’s positional
embedding face challenges with constructing a full attention
matrix between positions. RoPE uses a rotation matrix to
encode the absolute position of words and simultaneously in-
cludes explicit relative position details in self-attention. RoPE
brings useful features like flexibility with sentence lengths, a
decrease in word dependency as relative distances increase,
and the ability to improve linear self-attention with relative
position encoding. GPT-NeoX-20B, PaLM, CODEGEN, and
LLaMA are among models that take advantage of RoPE in
their architectures.
4) Relative Positional Bias : The concept behind this type
of positional embedding is to facilitate extrapolation during
inference for sequences longer than those encountered in train-
ing. In [128] Press et al. proposed Attention with Linear Biases
(ALiBi). Instead of simply adding positional embeddings to
word embeddings, they introduced a bias to the attention scores
of query-key pairs, imposing a penalty proportional to their
distance. In the BLOOM model, ALiBi is leveraged.
E. Model Pre-training
Pre-training is the very first step in large language model
training pipeline, and it helps LLMs to acquire fundamental
language understanding capabilities, which can be useful in a
wide range of language related tasks. During pre-training, the
LLM is trained on a massive amount of (usually) unlabeled
texts, usually in a self-supervised manner. There are different
approaches used for pre-training like next sentence prediction
[24], two most common ones include, next token prediction
(autoregressive language modeling), and masked language
modeling.
In Autoregressive Language Modeling framework, given
a sequence of n tokens x1, ..., xn, the model tries to predict
next token xn+1 (and sometimes next sequence of tokens) in
an auto-regressive fashion. One popular loss function in this
case is the log-likelihood of predicted tokens as shown in Eq
2
LALM(x) =
NX
i=1
p(xi+n|xi, ..., xi+n−1) (1)
Given the auto-regressive nature of this framework, the
decoder-only models are naturally better suited to learn how
to accomplish these task.
In Masked Language Modeling , some words are masked
in a sequence and the model is trained to predict the masked
words based on the surrounding context. Sometimes people
refer to this approach as denoising autoencoding, too. If we
denote the masked/corrupted samples in the sequence x, as ˜x,
then the training objective of this approach can be written as:
LM LM(x) =
NX
i=1
p(˜x|x\˜x) (2)
And more recently, Mixture of Experts (MoE) [130],
[131] have become very popular in LLM space too. MoEs
enable models to be pre-trained with much less compute,
which means one can dramatically scale up the model or
dataset size with the same compute budget as a dense model.
MoE consists of two main elements: Sparse MoE layers ,
which are used instead of dense feed-forward network (FFN)
layers, and have a certain number of “experts” (e.g. 8), in
which each expert is a neural network. In practice, the experts
are FFNs, but they can also be more complex networks. A gate
network or router , that determines which tokens are sent to
which expert. It is worth noting that, one can send a token
to more than one expert. How to route a token to an expert
is one of the big decisions when working with MoEs - the
router is composed of learned parameters and is pretrained at
the same time as the rest of the network. Fig 29 provides an
illustration of a Switch Transformer encoder block, which are
used in MoE.