Fig. 33: Time Complexity comparison of RWKV with different
Transformers. Here T denotes the sequence length, d the
feature dimension, and c is MEGA’s chunk size of quadratic
attention. Courtesy of [141].
2) Low-Rank Adaption (LoRA) : Low-Rank Adaptation is
a popular and lightweight training technique that significantly
reduces the number of trainable parameters, and is based
on a crucial insight that the difference between the fine-
tuned weights for a specialized task and the initial pre-trained
weights often exhibits “low intrinsic rank” - meaning that
it can be approximated well by a low rank matrix [142].
Training with LoRA is much faster, memory-efficient, and
produces smaller model weights (a few hundred MBs), that are
easier to store and share. One property of low-rank matrices
is that they can be represented as the product of two smaller
matrices. This realization leads to the hypothesis that this delta
between fine-tuned weights and initial pre-trained weights can
be represented as the matrix product of two much smaller
matrices. By focusing on updating these two smaller matrices
rather than the entire original weight matrix, computational
efficiency can be substantially improved.
Specifically, for a pre-trained weight matrix W0 ∈ Rd×k,
LoRA constrains its update by representing the latter with
a low-rank decomposition W0 + ∆W = W0 + BA, where
B ∈ Rd×r , A ∈ Rr×k, and the rank r ≪ min(d, k). During
training, W0 is frozen and does not receive gradient updates,
while A and B contain trainable parameters. It is worth
mentioning that both W0 and ∆W = BA are multiplied with
the same input, and their respective output vectors are summed
coordinate-wise. For h = W0x, their modified forward pass
yields: h = W0x + ∆W x = W0x + BAx. Usually a random
Gaussian initialization is used for A, and zero initialization
for B, so ∆W = BA is zero at the beginning of training.
They then scale ∆W x by αr, where α is a constant in r. This
reparametrization is illustrated in Figure 34
It is worth mentioning that LoRA can be applied to a subset
of weight matrices in a neural network to reduce the number
of trainable parameters. In the Transformer architecture, there
are four weight matrices in the self-attention module ( Wq ,
Wk, Wv , Wo), and two in the MLP module. Most of the
time, LoRA is focused on adapting the attention weights only
for downstream tasks, and freezes the MLP modules, so they
are not trained in downstream tasks both for simplicity and
parameter-efficiency.
3) Knowledge Distillation : Knowledge distillation is the
process of learning from a larger model [143]. Earlier days of
best-performing models release have proven that this approach
is very useful even if it is used in an API distillation approach.
Fig. 34: An illustration of LoRA reparametrizan. Only A and
B trained during this process. Courtesy of [142].
It is also referred to as an approach to distill the knowledge of
not a single model but in fact multiple models into a smaller
one. Creating smaller models by this approach yields smaller
model sizes that can be used even on edge devices. Knowledge
distillation as shown in Fig 35, illustrates a general setup of
this training scheme.
Fig. 35: A generic knowledge distillation framework with
student and teacher (Courtesy of [144]).
Knowledge can be transferred by different forms of learn-
ing: response distillation, feature distillation, and API distilla-
tion. Response distillation is concerned only with the outputs
of the teacher model and tries to teach the student model
how to exactly or at least similarly perform (in the sense of
prediction) as the teacher. Feature distillation not only uses
the last layer but also intermediate layers as well to create a
better inner representation for the student model. This helps the
smaller model to have a similar representation as the teacher
model.
API distillation is the process of using an API (typically
from an LLM provider such as OpenAI) to train smaller
models. In the case of LLMs, it is used to train the model
from the direct output of the larger model which makes it very
similar to response distillation. Many concerns are raised by
this type of distillation because in cases where the model itself
is not openly available, a (usually) paid API is exposed for end
users. On the other hand, while users pay for each call, how to
use the predictions is limited, for example, OpenAI prohibits
usage of its API to create LLMs that later will be used to
compete with it. The main value in such case is training data.
4) Quantization: deep learning in its core, is a set of
mathematical functions applied to matrices, with a specific