Fig. 42: Datasets licensed under different licenses.
This dataset is based on English tests completed by
Chinese students from middle school and high school,
aged 12 to 18, and it contains roughly 28, 000 texts
and 100, 000 questions rigorously prepared by human
specialists, primarily English instructors. This dataset
contains a wide range of subjects that were purpose-
fully chosen to assess students’ comprehension and
reasoning abilities. This dataset is available in three
subgroups: RACE-M, RACE-H, and RACE. RACE-
M refers to the middle school examinations, whereas
RACE-H denotes the high school tests. Finally, RACE
is the synthesis of RACE-M and RACE-H.
• SQuAD [187] stands for “Stanford Question Answer-
ing Dataset” and is a crowdsourced reading compre-
hension dataset based on Wikipedia articles. It has
approximately 100, 000 question-answer pairs con-
nected to more than 500 articles. The answers to
these questions are typically text fragments or spans
taken from the corresponding reading passages. The
questions may be unanswerable in some cases. The
dataset is divided into three sets: an 80% training set,
a 10% development set, and a 10% hidden test set.
• BoolQ [188] is a yes/no question-answering dataset
where the goal is reading comprehension task. BoolQ
includes 15, 942 examples. Each example is a triplet
that includes a question, a relevant paragraph, and
the solution. Although the main intuition behind
this dataset is for reading comprehension, it can be
used for reasoning, natural language inference, and
question-answering tasks.
• MultiRC [189] is another dataset that fits reading
comprehension task. MultiRC contains brief para-
graphs as well as multi-sentence questions that can
be answered using the information in the paragraph.
The paragraphs in this dataset come from a variety
of sources, including news, fiction, historical texts,
Wikipedia articles, discussions on society and law,
elementary school science textbooks, and 9/11 re-
ports. Each question has many response choices, with
one or more of them being correct. Answering the
questions requires reasoning across several sentences.
MultiRC dataset encompasses around 6, 000 multi-
sentence questions gathered from over 800 paragraphs.
On average, each question offers about two valid
answer alternatives out of a total of five.
B. Datasets for Emergent: ICL, reasoning (CoT), instruction
following
This section centers on the benchmarks and datasets em-
ployed to evaluate the emergent abilities of LLMs.
• GSM8K [190] is designed to evaluate the model’s
ability for multi-step mathematical reasoning. GSM8K
includes 8.5K linguistically diverse grade school math
word problems written by humans. The dataset is split
into two sets: a training set with 7.5K problems,
and a test set with 1K problems. These problems
need 2 to 8 steps to be solved. Solutions mainly