vocabulary CV tasks. We advocate the concept of computer vision in the wild,1 and encourage
the development and evaluation of future foundation models for this.
– Image-only self-supervision. This line of work aims to learn image representations from su-
pervision signals mined from the images themselves, ranging from contrastive learning (Chen
et al., 2020a; He et al., 2020), non-contrastive learning (Grill et al., 2020; Chen and He, 2021;
Caron et al., 2021), to masked image modeling (Bao et al., 2022; He et al., 2022a).
– Multimodal fusion, region-level and pixel-level pre-training. Besides the methods of pre-
training image backbones, we will also discuss pre-training methods that allow multimodal
fusion (e.g., CoCa (Yu et al., 2022a), Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022)), region-level and pixel-
level image understanding, such as open-set object detection (e.g., GLIP (Li et al., 2022e)) and
promptable semgentation (e.g., SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023)). These methods typically rely on a
pre-trained image encoder or a pre-trained image-text encoder pair.
• Visual Generation Models. (Highlighted with green in Figure 1.2) Recently, foundation image
generation models have been built, due to the emergence of large-scale image-text data. The
techniques that make it possible include the vector-quantized V AE methods (Razavi et al., 2019),
diffusion-based models (Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021) and auto-regressive models.
– Text-conditioned visual generation. This research area focuses on generating faithful vi-
sual content, including images, videos, and more, conditioned on open-ended text descrip-
tions/prompts. Text-to-image generation develops generative models that synthesize images of
high fidelity to follow the text prompt. Prominent examples include DALL-E (Ramesh et al.,
2021a), DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2021; sta, 2022),
Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022), and Parti (Yu et al., 2022b). Building on the success of text-
to-image generation models, text-to-video generation models generate videos based on text
prompts, such as Imagen Video (Ho et al., 2022) and Make-A-Video (Singer et al., 2022).
– Human-aligned visual generator. This research area focuses on improving the pre-trained
visual generator to better follow human intentions. Efforts have been made to address vari-
ous challenges inherent to base visual generators. These include improving spatial control-
lability (Zhang and Agrawala, 2023; Yang et al., 2023b), ensuring better adherence to text
prompts (Black et al., 2023), supporting flexible text-based editing (Brooks et al., 2023), and
facilitating visual concept customization (Ruiz et al., 2023).
• General-purpose Interface. (Highlighted with blue in Figure 1.2) The aforementioned multi-
modal foundation models are designed for specific purposes – tackling a specific set of CV prob-
lems/tasks. Recently, we see an emergence of general-purpose models that lay the basis of AI
agents. Existing efforts focus on three research topics. The first topic aims to unify models for vi-
sual understanding and generation. These models are inspired by the unification spirit of LLMs in
NLP, but do not explicitly leverage pre-trained LLM in modeling. In contrast, the other two topics
embrace and involve LLMs in modeling, including training and chaining with LLMs, respectively.
– Unified vision models for understanding and generation. In computer vision, several at-
tempts have been made to build a general-purpose foundation model by combining the func-
tionalities of specific-purpose multimodal models. To this end, a unified model architecture
is adopted for various downstream computer vision and vision-language (VL) tasks. There
are different levels of unification. First, a prevalent effort is to bridge vision and language by
converting all closed-set vision tasks to open-set ones, such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021),
GLIP (Li et al., 2022f), OpenSeg (Ghiasi et al., 2022a), etc. Second, the unification of differ-
ent VL understanding tasks across different granularity levels is also actively explored, such
as I/O unification methods like UniTAB (Yang et al., 2021), Unified-IO (Lu et al., 2022a)),
Pix2Seq-v2 (Chen et al., 2022d) and functional unification methods like GPV (Gupta et al.,
2022a), GLIP-v2 (Zhang et al., 2022b)) and X-Decoder (Zou et al., 2023a). In the end, it is also
necessitated to make the models more interactive and promptable like ChatGPT, and this has
been recently studied in SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) and SEEM (Zou et al., 2023b).
– Training with LLMs. Similar to the behavior of LLMs, which can address a language task by
following the instruction and processing examples of the task in their text prompt, it is desirable
to develop a visual and text interface to steer the model towards solving a multimodal task. By
extending the capability of LLMs to multimodal settings and training the model end-to-end,
multimodal LLMs or large multimodal models are developed, including Flamingo (Alayrac
et al., 2022) and Multimodal GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023a).
1Computer-Vision-in-the-Wild Readings.
8