– Chaining tools with LLM. Exploiting the tool use capabilities of LLMs, an increasing num-
ber of studies integrate LLMs such as ChatGPT with various multimodal foundation models to
facilitate image understanding and generation through a conversation interface. This interdis-
ciplinary approach combines the strengths of NLP and computer vision, enabling researchers
to develop more robust and versatile AI systems that are capable of processing visual informa-
tion and generating human-like responses via human-computer conversations. Representative
works include Visual ChatGPT (Wu et al., 2023a) and MM-R EACT (Yang* et al., 2023).
1.2 Definition and Transition from Specialists to General-Purpose Assistants
Based on the model development history and taxonomy in NLP, we group multimodal foundation
models in Figure 1.2 into two categories.
• Specific-Purpose Pre-trained Vision Models cover most existing multimodal foundation mod-
els, including visual understanding models ( e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), SimCLR (Chen
et al., 2020a), BEiT (Bao et al., 2022), SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023)) and visual generation models
(e.g., Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2021; sta, 2022)), as they present powerful transferable
ability for specific vision problems.
• General-Purpose Assistants refer to AI agents that can follow human intents to complete various
computer vision tasks in the wild. The meanings of general-purpose assistants are two-fold: (i)
generalists with unified architectures that could complete tasks across different problem types, and
(ii) easy to follow human instruction, rather than replacing humans. To this end, several research
topics have been actively explored, including unified vision modeling (Lu et al., 2022a; Zhang
et al., 2022b; Zou et al., 2023a), training and chaining with LLMs (Liu et al., 2023c; Zhu et al.,
2023a; Wu et al., 2023a; Yang* et al., 2023).
1.3 Who Should Read this Paper?
This paper is based on our CVPR 2023 tutorial,2 with researchers in the computer vision and vision-
language multimodal communities as our primary target audience. It reviews the literature and
explains topics to those who seek to learn the basics and recent advances in multimodal foundation
models. The target audiences are graduate students, researchers and professionals who are not ex-
perts of multimodal foundation models but are eager to develop perspectives and learn the trends in
the field. The structure of this paper is illustrated in Figure 1.3. It consists of 7 chapters.
• Chapter 1 introduces the landscape of multimodal foundation model research, and presents a his-
torical view on the transition of research from specialists to general-purpose assistants.
• Chapter 2 introduces different ways to consume visual data, with a focus on how to learn a strong
image backbone.
• Chapter 3 describes how to produce visual data that aligns with human intents.
• Chapter 4 describes how to design unified vision models, with an interface that is interactive and
promptable, especially when LLMs are not employed.
• Chapter 5 describes how to train an LLM in an end-to-end manner to consume visual input for
understanding and reasoning.
• Chapter 6 describes how to chain multimodal tools with an LLM to enable new capabilities.
• Chapter 7 concludes the paper and discusses research trends.
Relations among Chapters 2-6. Chapter 2-6 are the core chapters of this survey paper. An
overview of the structure for these chapters are provided in Figure 1.2. We start with a discus-
sion of two typical multimodal foundation models for specific tasks, including visual understanding
in Chapter 2 and visual generation in Chapter 3. As the notion of multimodal foundation models are
originally based on visual backbone/representation learning for understanding tasks, we first present
a comprehensive review to the transition of image backbone learning methods, evolving from early
2https://vlp-tutorial.github.io/2023/index.html
9