supervised methods to the recent language-image contrastive methods, and extend the discussion
on image representations from image-level to region-level and pixel-level (Chapter 2). Recently,
generative AI is becoming increasingly popular, where vision generative foundation models have
been developed. In Chapter 3, we discuss large pre-trained text-to-image models, and various ways
that the community leverage the generative foundation models to develop new techniques to make
them better aligned with human intents. Inspired by the recent advances in NLP that LLMs serve as
general-purpose assistants for a wide range of language tasks in daily life, the computer vision com-
munity has been anticipating and attempting to build general-purpose visual assistants. We discuss
three different ways to build general-purpose assistants. Inspired by the spirit of LLMs, Chapter 4
focuses on unifying different vision models of understanding and generation without explicitly in-
corporating LLMs in modeling. In contrast, Chapter 5 and Chapter 6 focus on embracing LLMs to
build general-purpose visual assistants, by explicitly augmenting LLMs in modeling. Specifically,
Chapter 5 describes end-to-end training methods, and Chapter 6 focuses on training-free approaches
that chain various vision models to LLMs.
How to read the paper. Different readers have different backgrounds, and may have different
purposes of reading this paper. Here, we provide a few guidance.
• Each chapter is mostly self-contained. If you have a clear goal and a clear research direction
that you want to focus on, then just jump to the corresponding chapter. For example, if you are
interested in building a mini prototype using OpenAI’s multimodal GPT-4, then you can directly
jump to Chapter 5.
• If you are a beginner of multimodal foundation models, and are interested in getting a glimpse
of the cutting-edge research, we highly recommend that you read the whole paper chapter by
chapter in order, as the early chapters serve as the building blocks of later chapters, and each
chapter provides the description of the key concepts to help you understand the basic ideas, and a
comprehensive literature review that to help you grasp the landscape and state of the art.
• If you already have rich experience in multimodal foundation models and are familiar with the
literature, feel free to jump to specific chapters you want to read. In particular, we include in most
chapters a section to discuss advanced topics and sometimes provide our own perspectives, based
on the up-to-date literature. For example, in Chapter 6, we discuss several important aspects of
multimodal agents in tool use, including tool creation and its connection to retrieval-augmented
methods.
1.4 Related Materials: Slide Decks and Pre-recorded Talks
This survey paper extends what we present in the CVPR 2023 tutorial by covering the most recent
advances in the field. Below, we provide a list of slide decks and pre-recorded talks, which are
related to the topics in each chapter, for references.
• Chapter 2: Visual and Vision-Language Pre-training (Youtube, Bilibili)
• Chapter 3: Alignments in Text-to-Image Generation (Youtube, Bilibili)
• Chapter 4: From Representation to Interface: The Evolution of Foundation for Vision Under-
standing (Youtube, Bilibili)
• Chapter 5: Large Multimodal Models (Youtube, Bilibili)
• Chapter 6: Multimodal Agents: Chaining Multimodal Experts with LLMs (Youtube, Bilibili)
11