controlled text), augmenting the global image description in T2I models. This new input condition
requires T2I models to understand spatial inputs, and associate them with grounded texts.
ReCo (Yang et al., 2023b) is among the most representative works along this direction. The core
idea is to extend the text vocabulary of the text encoder E and arrange different tokens to represent
the grounded text inputs. The study augments text tokens understood using pre-trained T2I models
with an extra set of position tokens, which represent the quantized spatial coordinates. As shown in
Figure 3.4, the position tokens ( e.g., <687>, <204>, <999>, <833>) are seamlessly mixed with
the text tokens and operate as a spatial modifier, indicating that the text to follow only operates
on the specified spatial region, such as the “baseball player . . . jersey.” The pre-trained T2I model
is then finetuned to support such a new input interface, thereby facilitating region-controlled T2I
generation.
Shared by other approaches along this direction, ReCo discusses several advantages of region-
controlled T2I generation in improving the alignment with human intents. (i) The grounded texts
provide an extra input condition that allows users to specify the desired image easily, i.e., having a
free-form regional description precisely at a specific location. The box token and the input sequence
design allow users to generate grounded text with the same user interface as query a T2I model
with text, making the extension easy to use. (ii) The additional region-level controlled texts help
better generate images with correct object count, spatial relationship, and region attributes such as
color/size, which may otherwise confuse the vanilla T2I model (Rombach et al., 2022).(iii) Studies
also observe a better image generation quality, with the conjecture that the grounded text provides
object-level image-text association and therefore simplifies the learning process.
GLIGEN (Li et al., 2023n) is another representative work. Alternate to generating grounded de-
scriptions through the expansion of input tokens and finetuning the entire T2I model, GLIGEN uses
a plug-and-play recipe: freezing the original T2I model and training extra gated self-attention layers
to learn the new grounding skills. The grounding tokens carry two types of information: the seman-
tic representation of text words that need to be grounded in and their spatial configurations. These
grounding tokens are then added to the pre-trained T2I model via a newly added gated self-attention
layer, with all remaining pre-trained parameters frozen. This layer is equipped with a gating pa-
rameter, which is initialized to zero, allowing the pre-trained model to incrementally incorporate the
grounded text inputs. GLIGEN facilitates various types of grounded controls, including bounding
box grounding, keypoint grounding, image prompting, as well as other types of spatially-aligned
dense conditions.
T2I generation with dense conditions. In addition to spatial coordinates, there exist other spatial
conditions often represented as 2D arrays, such as segmentation masks, edge maps and depth maps.
ControlNet (Zhang and Agrawala, 2023) is a prominent example of incorporating these dense spatial
controls into T2I models. ControlNet is built upon Stable Diffusion, and introduces an additional
trainable ControlNet branch that adds an extra input condition to the text prompt. This extra con-
dition can be a canny edge map, hough line, HED boundary, under sketching, human pose maps,
segmentation masks, depth images, normal maps, or line drawing, each enabled with its distinct
model copy. The added branch is initialized from the pre-trained downsampling blocks in the SD’s
U-Net. This branch takes the added visual latent and the extra dense condition as input. Before com-
bining input dense conditions with visual latent in the input and merging the ControlNet branch’s
output back to SD’s upsampling blocks, there is a unique zero-initialized1 × 1 convolutional layer.
This layer serves as a gated connector to gradually inject the extra condition into the pre-trained Sta-
ble Diffusion model. With the extra dense spatial control, ControlNet provides an effective channel
of generation controllability.
Follow-up studies such as Uni-ControlNet (Zhao et al., 2023b) and UniControl (Qin et al., 2023a)
further improve ControlNet by unifying the input condition, such that a single model can under-
stand multiple input condition types or even take a combination of two conditions. Examples of
the dense controls and the corresponding generated images are shown in Figure 3.5. Moreover,
Disco (Wang et al., 2023f) exemplifies the efficiency of ControlNet in the generation of human
dancing videos, which aims to generate videos with controllable elements such as human subjects,
video backgrounds, and motion pose sequences. The study successfully separates the background
and human pose conditions, which are fed into two distinct branches of ControlNet, which condition
on image frames and pose maps, respectively. This disentanglement of control from all three con-
ditions allows Disco to accomplish high fidelity in both the human foregrounds and backgrounds.
32