Figure 3.10: Failure cases of vanilla T2I model in text prompt following. Image credit: Feng et al.
(2022b).
Figure 3.11: Inference time guidance proposed in Attend-and-Excite. Image credit: Chefer et al.
(2023).
2023) show that T2I models may fail to follow text prompts, especially when the image description
becomes complicated. For example, certain noun phrases may get omitted, attributes may apply to
incorrect objects, and generated images may have the wrong object count, relationship, styles, etc..
These limitations motivate work on improving T2I models to better follow text prompts.
The related literature can be broadly categorized into two main groups. (i) Inference-time manip-
ulation. In the inference stage, the latent and attention adjustment (Liu et al., 2022a; Feng et al.,
2022b; Chefer et al., 2023; Agarwal et al., 2023) design various methods to redistribute the visual
latent or image-text cross-attention, such that all noun phrases in the text prompts are represented in
the generated image. (ii) Alignment tuning. An extra model learning stage is learned (Black et al.,
2023; Fan et al., 2023b), typically with the image-text similarity as rewards, such that the tuned T2I
model can better follow text prompts.
Inference-time manipulation. Training with image-text pairs does not guarantee that T2I models
consistently adhere to the text prompts. There can be multiple discrepancies, particularly when the
text descriptions are lengthy and intricate. For instance, T2I models may apply attributes to the
wrong entity or miss certain objects, as shown in Figure 3.10. Intuitively, parsing the text query at
inference time and explicitly enforcing T2I models to pay closer attention to each noun phrase may
generate images that better follow text prompts.
Building upon this intuition, StructureDiffusion (Feng et al., 2022b) employs a parsing tree to extract
noun phrases and the text prompt’s linguistic structure. The study then enforces the model to “look
at” all extracted noun phrases. This is implemented by modifying SD’s cross-attention mechanism
introduced in (3.1), written as O = M · V where M is the softmax cross-attention map. Instead of
producing M with the sentence feature V , which may result in words getting overlooked, the study
computes the O = 1
k+1Σk
i=0(M · Vi), where V0 is the sentence feature V , and Vi, i = 1, . . . , kis the
phrase feature in the parsing tree. This approach ensures that the visual stream maintains a balanced
attention across all identified noun phrases, fostering more accurate image generation.
Motivated by the same objective to ensure that no object is overlooked, Attend-and-Excite (Chefer
et al., 2023) manipulates the attention map. As shown in the right side equations in Figure 3.11,
a regularization loss ℓ is computed to amplify the maximal attention towards the most neglected
subject token:
ℓ = max
n=1,...,Nsub
(1 − max G(M n
t ))
36