Figure 3.12: DDPO with vision-language-model-based reward function for image-text alignment
tuning. Image credit: Black et al. (2023).
where G is a Gaussian kernel to smooth the attention map and Nsub is the number of subject tokens.
The loss is then used to update the latent zt at inference time:
z′
t = zt − α▽zt ℓ,
where α is a scalar for the step size. Results show that this inference-time guidance enables T2I
models to focus more on objects described in the text prompt, resulting in superior image genera-
tion. Follow-up studies (Agarwal et al., 2023) further refine the guidance loss to optimize prompt-
following performance.
Model tuning to follow text prompt. Instead of inference-time manipulation, one may wonder
if we can refine a pre-trained T2I model to better follow text prompts. One promising way to
achieve this is via reinforcement learning, using image-text similarity as reward instead of the image
generation objective used in the main T2I training. This allows the model to be optimized towards a
better image-text alignment.
One work along this direction is the denoising diffusion policy optimization (DDPO) (Black et al.,
2023), with the tuning framework shown in Figure 3.12. Specifically, a vision-language model (Li
et al., 2023e) is used to convert the generated image into a text description. This generated
caption is compared with the input text prompt, deriving a similarity reward through the use of
BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2019). The similarity reward is then used to finetune the pre-trained T2I
model, such that the model can better follow the text prompts. The bottom of Figure 3.12 shows the
progression of the generated sample during this similarity-based training. Further, it is worth noting
that other human intent may also be formatted as rewards for model tuning, such as compressibility,
aesthetic quality, etc.
Summary and trends. In this section, we present studies aimed at enhancing the capability of T2I
models to better adhere to text prompts. Despite the good performance achieved by the inference-
time manipulation, the alignment tuning provides a more intuitive user experience, eliminating the
need for extra modifications. In parallel to instruction tuning in LLMs to align human intent for
text generation, the TI2 model tuning shares a similar goal, but focuses on image generation. We
foresee a similar paradigm emerging in the near future for generative T2I foundational model devel-
opment. Specifically, the initial training phase still relies on the existing image generation objective
on large-scale data, while the subsequent alignment-tuning phase enhances the model’s prompt ad-
herence and other aspects of human intent, such as diminishing harmful content. Current RL-based
methods show potentials, but they typically zero in on a single optimization goal. Future research
could extend these methods for more adaptable alignment tuning, amalgamated with features like
accommodating diverse image and text scenarios.
37