Chapter 4
Unified Vision Models
In this chapter, we discuss the unification of vision models. We start with an overview of the chal-
lenges in the unification of vision models and the most recent efforts towards this goal in Section 4.1.
What follows are detailed discussions on(i) how to transform closed-set models to open-set ones in
Section 4.2; (ii) how to unify different granularities of vision tasks in Section 4.3; and (iii) how to
build a more promptable interface for vision in Section 4.4. Finally, we summarize the chapter and
discuss future trends in Section 4.5.
4.1 Overview
Before talking about general-purpose unified vision systems, we revisit how language models and
natural language processing (NLP) have evolved in the past years. Before 2018, different NLP
tasks are addressed with different task-specific models, such as translation (Bahdanau et al., 2015),
semantic parsing (Berant et al., 2013), summarization (Allahyari et al., 2017), and so on. With
the emergence of the transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), language models for different
NLP tasks are unified with a decoder-only architecture, e.g., the GPT models (Brown et al., 2020).
Afterwards, the GPT models learned using the next word prediction task are further finetuned to
follow human instructions. This leads to ChatGPT 1, which fundamentally changes our expectations
on what AI systems can do. The evolution as depicted in Figure 1.1 motivates us to wonder whether
we can build a general-purpose vision system in a similar manner.
Challenges. That computer vision tasks vary greatly presents a great challenge to build a unified
vision model. First, vision tasks have different types of inputs, ranging from static images (Rus-
sakovsky et al., 2015) to sequential videos (Miech et al., 2019), from pure vision inputs such as
image dehazing (He et al., 2010) to multi-modality inputs that include e.g., vision and language An-
tol et al. (2015). Second, different granularities are required for different tasks, such as image-level
tasks like image classification (He et al., 2016) and captioning (Vinyals et al., 2016), region-level
tasks like object detection (Girshick, 2015) and grounding (Plummer et al., 2015), and pixel-level
tasks like image segmentation (He et al., 2017), super-resolution (Wang et al., 2020),etc. As a result,
the outputs of vision systems are also of different formats, such as spatial information like edges,
boxes, and masks, semantic information like class labels, multi-label tags, or detailed descriptions.
In addition to the challenges in modeling, there are also challenges with data. First, the cost of
annotation varies greatly among different types of labels. As shown in Figure 4.6, these labels are at
different levels of granularity and semantic richness, ranging from whole images, regions (box an-
notations), to masks (pixel annotations). Second, it is in general much more costly to collect image
data than text data. So, the scale of vision data is often much smaller than that of text corpora.
Towards a unified vision model. Despite these challenges, there is a growing interest in the com-
puter vision community to develop a general-purpose, unified vision system, in particular for visual
understanding tasks. As illustrated in Figure 4.1, we group these efforts in three categories:
1https://chat.openai.com/
42