(a)
Box Annotation
(COCO, O365)
Mask Annotation
(COCO, LVIS)
Image Annotation
(ImageNet, LAION)
poor
rich
fine
coarse (b)
Figure 4.6: (a) CV task landscape: CV tasks can span different axes, including modality, space
and time, which renders significant challenges to unify all of them in a single model. Image credit:
Yuan et al. (2021). (b) The data scale pyramid: In particular, datasets in different tasks usually
contain different types of supervision. Image-level datasets like ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) and
LAION Schuhmann et al. (2021) have annotations that have rich semantics coverage but are coarse-
grained, while pixel-level datasets like COCO panoptic segmentation (Chen et al., 2015) provides
fine-grained annotations but with limited concepts.
4.3 From Task-Specific Models to Generic Models
Above we have discussed the recent efforts of transforming closed-set models to open-set ones for
detection and segmentation. Until recently, however, most vision tasks have been separately tackled
with specialized model designs, preventing the synergy of tasks across different granularities or
domains from being exploited. This is arguably due to two reasons:
• Vision tasks are fragmented . As shown in Figure 4.6 (a), computer vision tasks span across
different axes including space, time, and modality. From the space aspect, it can be image-level,
region-level and pixel-level tasks as we discussed before. Along the time axis, we need to tackle
not only static images but also temporal video sequences. Regarding the modality, the inputs and
outputs can be images, texts, or other types ( e.g., human pose, depth map). Such diverse task
formats significantly impede the development of a unified model for all tasks.
• Data scales are different . In addition to the complicated task landscape, the scarcity of hu-
man annotations and their different scales for different tasks also make building a unified model
challenging. In Figure 4.6 (b), we can see a clear pyramid of data scale, where different lay-
ers of human annotations have different semantics. More specifically, image-text datasets like
LAION Schuhmann et al. (2021) contain up to 2B samples, while object detection datasets like
Objects365 (Shao et al., 2019) have 1.7M images in total. More significant gap is observed in
segmentation datasets due to the high cost of annotating masks.
Despite the aforementioned challenges, we are now witnessing a growing interest in building unified,
general-purpose models that can learn from and be applied to a diverse set of vision and vision-
language tasks, thanks to the versatility of transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). These attempts can
be grouped into two main categories:
• I/O Unification. Following the development of unified LLMs, a number of recent works reformu-
late many vision tasks as a sequence-to-sequence problem (Wang et al., 2022b; Yang et al., 2022c;
Chen et al., 2022d; Lu et al., 2022a). They typically use a tokenizer to tokenize the original inputs
and outputs (I/O) in different modalities used in various tasks into a coherent sequence (visual or
text) tokens and then exploit a unified, sequence-to-sequence model.
• Functionality Unification. In addition to I/O unification, one might built a generic model via
functionality unification. Extending multi-task learning methods (Lu et al., 2020; Gupta et al.,
2022a; Hu and Singh, 2021a), many recent use a coherent encoder-decoder architectures (Yu
et al., 2022a; Zhang et al., 2022b; Zou et al., 2023a). This line of work usually does not need task-
49