(a) UberNet
 (b) Taskonomy
Figure 4.12: (a) UberNet (Kokkinos, 2017) can be applied to 7 vision tasks using a unified and
budget-controllable CNN architecture. (b) Taskonomy (Zamir et al., 2018) further studies the rela-
tionship across vision tasks by exploiting a multi-task transfer modeling. Image credit: Kokkinos
(2017) and Zamir et al. (2018).
different numbers of layers from the top in CNNs so as to adapt to different vision tasks. Results
show that the best-performing multi-task architecture depends on the tasks of interest and can hardly
generalize to new tasks. UberNet (Kokkinos, 2017) takes one step further to use a single universal
CNN architecture and sophisticatedly design a routing mechanism to save the memory and comput-
ing cost, as shown in Figure 4.12 (a). Both works require some tweaking to the CNN architecture so
that they can adapt to different levels of tasks and loss types. But they unfortunately fail to build the
synergy across tasks to improve model performance. Taskonomy (Zamir et al., 2018) specifically
studies the relationship among vision tasks. It first trains task-specific models for each individual
task and then performs transfer modeling across tasks in the latent space. The task affinity is then
calculated in the latent space, providing us with the taskonomy. The result shows that vision tasks
have different affinities for different groups, as shown in Figure 4.12 (b). For example, surface nor-
mal estimation is heavily related to reshaping and point matching. Curvature extraction is related
to image segmentation tasks. This study provides deep insights for multi-task vision modeling (Xu
et al., 2018; Crawshaw, 2020).
Multi-modal models. The emergence of Transformers significantly facilitates the advancement
of multi-task multi-modal learning. Among them, 12in1 (Lu et al., 2020) is one of the pioneering
works that combine 12 vision-language tasks in a single BERT-based architecture. It uses task-
specific heads for individual tasks and a commonly shared trunk ViLBERT (Lu et al., 2019). Results
show that multi-task learning can achieve substantial improvements over single-task learning while
reducing the model parameters significantly. Later on, UniT (Hu and Singh, 2021b) exploits an
encoder-decoder architecture and expands to vision-only tasks like object detection. Additionally,
it allows end-to-end training on the task pool without relying on pre-trained detectors. Similar to
12in1, it also uses a task-specific head for each task, motivated by the empirical result that sharing
the same head usually hurts performance. Likewise, E2E-VLP (Xu et al., 2021) proposes an end-to-
end pipeline for both localization tasks and text generation. Both UniT and E2E-VLP demonstrate
the versatility of the encoder-decoder architecture of DETR (Carion et al., 2020). Following the
same spirit, GPV (Gupta et al., 2022b) proposes an end-to-end task-agnostic architecture for differ-
ent vision and vision-language tasks. It uses DETR to extract boxes and region features and then
exploits a cross-attention module for fusion, followed by a vision decoder and a language decoder
for decoding different outputs.
The above vision and multi-modal models unify different tasks by incorporating different modules
or heads designed to cope with different tasks, and can hardly achieve synergy across tasks. In the
following, we discuss recent model unification research that aims to make the best use of synergy
among various vision and multi-modal tasks.
54