Figure 4.14: SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) proposes a promptable segmentation model which can take
different spatial prompts in addition to text prompts. It further develops a data annotation engine to
scale up the mask-annotated data. Image credit: Kirillov et al. (2023).
Figure 4.15: SEEM (Zou et al., 2023b) can take different types of prompts as inputs for various
image segmentation tasks. Image credit: Zou et al. (2023b).
been formulated as visual prompting in that different types of visual inputs are usually encoded to
some unified format and then fed into a Transformer architecture, as shown in LLMs.
SEEM (Zou et al., 2023b) is one of the representative works that enable visual prompting to a vision
model for image segmentation. As shown in Figure 4.15, SEEM differs from the aforementioned
SAM and can take visual prompts by drawing points, boxes, and strokes on an image that can be
the target image or another reference image. It develops a new module called a visual sampler that
can extract visual features from an image according to the locations specified by users. Based on the
visual sampler, the model can even take another reference image as input without any training like
that. As a result, it shows impressive performance not only for various image segmentation tasks but
also for video object segmentation in a zero-shot manner.
PerSAM (Zhang et al., 2023h) develops a personalized segmentation model on top of SAM and
takes one shot as the input. It learns a specific model that takes a source image plus a mask as
input and then predicts the mask for a target image. To extract the visual prompts, mask pooling is
taken and used as the input tokens to the decoder of PerSAM. It also proposes a way to extract the
positive and negative priors based on feature matching to facilitate pre-trained SAM models with
comprehensive clues. Like most prompt learning methods in LLMs, a plausible feature for PerSAM
is that it can be easily attained by some off-the-shelf models like SAM. SAM-PT (Rajiˇc et al., 2023)
further applies this strategy to video object segmentation. Inspired by the spatial prompting in SAM,
it exploits a point-tracking system (Harley et al., 2022) to track different points (both positive and
negative ones) and then ask SAM to segment the image given the points. It exhibits strong point
tracking performance as well as segmentation.
Others. Some other works combine a wide range of visual prompting types. For example,
Painter (Wang et al., 2023i) reformulates different vision tasks ( e.g., depth estimation, image seg-
mentation) all as prompting and learns a decoder in an in-context learning manner. The prompts are
combinations of raw images and the corresponding dense annotations ( e.g., depth or segmentation
maps). In contrast, Prismer (Liu et al., 2023f) makes use of many off-the-shelf vision models to ex-
tract different information from the raw images and then feed the information to a vision-language
model. To facilitate the interplay across multiple modalities, ImageBind (Girdhar et al., 2023) learns
a universal alignment among image/video, language, audio and depth. Once the embedding space is
learned, it can be used to compose different types of prompts by simply doing the summations.
57