Figure 4.17: SegGPT (Wang et al., 2023j) proposes to perform in-context learning for image seg-
mentation. Image credit: Wang et al. (2023j).
Figure 4.18: Hummingbird (Bala ˇzevi´c et al., 2023) is proposed for in-context visual scene under-
standing through nearest-neighbor retrieval. Image credit: Balaˇzevi´c et al. (2023).
strategy is akin to earlier works that build classification models based on K-nearest-neighbor but
differently applied to dense prediction tasks.
Discussion. In-context learning is arguably an appealing feature. On one hand, there are a number
of works that attempt to bridge vision with LLM so as to inherit the in-context learning capability
such as Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022) and Kosmos-1 (Huang et al., 2023b). On the other hand,
researchers resort to pure vision-based in-context learning to address vision-specific tasks such as
image segmentation, depth estimation, etc. Thus far, there is no single model that can take multi-
modal inputs and predict different types of outputs as well in an in-context learning manner, which
may render a promising future direction along this line.
4.5 Summary and Discussion
To the end, an illustrative summary of the works that have been covered in this chapter is shown
in Figure 4.19. There is a clear trend in the vision community to build open-world, unified and
interactive vision models. Nevertheless, there are still some intrinsic differences between vision and
language. First, vision differs from language in that it captures the physical world with raw signals.
We need to develop some sophisticated tokenization methods to compress the raw data into compact
“tokens”. In the language domain, this can be easily done by using some well-established heuristic
tokenizers (Sennrich et al., 2016). Second, unlike language, vision data itself is not labeled and
thus difficult to convey information or knowledge. It always requires human labors to annotate the
visual contents in either a semantic or spatial manner. Third, language data is homogeneous while
vision data and tasks are heterogeneous. Last but not least, storing vision data is much more costly
59