Large Multimodal Models: Image-to-Text Generative ModelsqModel Architectures•(Pre-trained) Image Encoder and Language Models•Trainable modules to connect to two modalities
Vision EncoderConnection Module
Image
LanguageLanguage Model
A dog lying on the grass next to a frisbee
(a) Left: An example of image-to-text generation task; Right: Model architecture.
qTraining Objective•Cross-Attended Image-to-Text Generation•Autoregressive loss on language output
Language Model
Visual Tokens
Next Token
Tokens to Predict
Tokens to AttendText Tokens
Large Multimodal Models: Image-to-Text Generative Models
(b) Training objective and attention mask. For each row, the yellow elements indicate that the
prediction token attends the tokens on the left.
Figure 5.1: Illustration of image-to-text generation task, architecture, and training objective.
BLIP2 (Li et al., 2023h) are two large models that achieve state-of-the-art (SoTA) performance on
many datasets. The comparisons are shown in Figure 5.2(a). GIT initializes the image encoder with
contrastively pre-trained Florence model (Yuan et al., 2021), and trains the language model from
scratch. On the other hand, BLIP2 freezes the weights of a pre-trained image encoder and a pre-
trained language model, while trains a lightweight Q-former module to connect the image encoder
and the language model.
Case study II: LMM trained with interleaved image-text sequence instances. We use
Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022) as an example, shown in Figure 5.2(b). It connects the frozen
pre-trained image encoder and language model – by adding novel architectural components in be-
tween. Specifically, Perceiver Sampler module helps reduce computational complexity, and Gated
Transformer module helps to stabilize training during the initial stage. Flamingo is trained on a mix-
ture of complementary large-scale multimodal data coming only from the web, without using any
data annotated for machine learning purposes. After this training is done, Flamingo can be directly
adapted to vision tasks via simple few-shot learning without any additional task-specific tuning.
Multimodal in-context-learning. Beside the SoTA performance on dozens of academic bench-
marks, probably the most appealing aspect of Flamingo is the emerging property: Multimodal In-
Context-Learning. Specifically, given a couple of image-text pairs as examples, Flamingo can zero-
shot task transfer to unseen problems, such as solving visual math problems. This means Flamingo
can tackle a number of difficult problems with just a handful of task-specific examples, without any
additional training required. For example in Figure 5.3, two new tasks are presented to Flamingo.
The top row provides two image-text pairs as the context in the prompt, where the text describes the
name of the animal in the image, followed by the geographical information of the animal. Flamingo
is able to understand the patterns presented in the examples, and output the corresponding informa-
tion for a new image. In the bottom row, the text first shows the optical character recognition (OCR)
result of the image, followed by the answer to the math problem. Flamingo follows the task instruc-
tion illustrated in the multimodal context, and outputs the correct answer for a new math problem
in the third image. This intriguing in-context learning capability makes Flamingo the GPT-3 mo-
ment (Brown et al., 2020) in the multimodal domain.
62