Figure 5.14: Application of LMMs to biomedical images. Top: Domain adaptation from LLaV A to
LLaV A-Med. Bottom: The chat behaviors of two chatbots. Image credit: Li et al. (2023e).
PaLM-M (Tu et al., 2023), Stanford Med-Flamingo (Moor et al., 2023) and radiology generalist (Wu
et al., 2023b).
5.5 How Close We Are To OpenAI Multimodal GPT-4?
With all the works mentioned above, are we close to (or, even surpassing) OpenAI Multimodal
GPT-4? It is encouraging to see that the open-source community has quickly developed a variety
of models and prototypes for various new capabilities. For example, LLaV A/Mini-GPT4 paves
the way towards building multimodal chatbots, with some examples that reproduce the results in
OpenAI GPT-4 technique report; CM3leon (Yu and et al, 2023), Emu (Sun et al., 2023a), GILL (Koh
et al., 2023) extends LMMs for end-to-end image generation, to the best of our knowledge, this is a
capability that the current GPT-4 does not exhibit. From the perspective of enabling new capabilities
with the minimum prototypes, the open-source community seems close to OpenAI Multimodal GPT-
4, by exploring the baby steps towards building the general-purpose multimodal assistant.
However, there is still a clear large gap in terms of scaling a given capability, e.g., for the visual
reasoning capability that we have observed in LLaV A. There are two more visual examples from
OpenAI technical report, to correctly answer the questions, it requires models to understand multiple
high-resolution images and long sequence text depicted in the image, as well as responding with
domain knowledge. It requires much more compute and more powerful language models, which are
not available to most people.
In summary, we have presented the background and strong capabilities of LMM, reviewed instruc-
tion tuning in LLMs, and showed how to build a prototype such as LLaV A and MiniGPT-4 using
open-source resources. We also summarized the most recent papers emerged on this line of research
to help those who are interested to gain the momentum to start the journey of LMM research. To
discuss the next steps to work on as a community, one sustainable suggestion can be that those with
resources can continue focusing on the scaling success and study new emerging properties, while
others focus on prototypes for new functionalities and evaluation, as well as developing techniques
to reduce the computational barriers and thus allow easier accessibility to large models.
76