6.3.1 System Design
MM-ReAct designs the system paradigm that composes numerous multimodal tools 1 with Chat-
GPT (OpenAI, 2022) for multimodal reasoning and action. By augmenting the language-only
ChatGPT with various multimodal tools, MM-R EACT supports both inputs and outputs in multi-
modalities, including text, image and video, as shown in Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.5: System design of MM-R EACT (Yang* et al., 2023).
Figure 6.5 shows the system design of MM-R EACT. The multimodal tools explored in MM-
REACT are mainly computer vision models that take an image as input and interpret the image
content from different perspectives. For instance, the image captioning model generates a natural
description, the OCR model extracts the scene text in the image, the celebrity recognition model
identifies the celebrity names, and the object detection model extracts the salient object with bound-
ing box locations. LLMs such as ChatGPT serves as the brain of the agent, which plans on which
tools to use, and in what order, based on the input image and the user intent. Next, with the example
in Figure 6.5, we unfold the planning and execution of MM-R EACT behind the scene.
User prompt. As ChatGPT only accepts language inputs, to enable image as inputs, we simply
use the file path as the input to ChatGPT. The file path functions as a placeholder, allowing ChatGPT
to treat it as a black box and later seek help from different tools during the planning stage. Besides
the input image, the user can also provide the intent in text format ( e.g. , a question about the input
image). When there is no text input from the user, the goal is to get a general understanding about
the image.
Planning. Upon receiving the input image and user prompt, ChatGPT plans for what tools to use.
Inspired by R EACT (Yao et al., 2022c), MM-R EACT instructs ChatGPT to respond with certain
watchwords, such as “Assistant, what objects are there in the image? <file path>”, if a specific
tool is required (i.e., action request in Figure 6.5). In practice, one can tell whether a multimodal
tool is needed by simply string-matching the keyword “Assistant,” in ChatGPT’s response.
1In Yang* et al. (2023), these tools are referred as experts. We unify the terminology as tools throughout
this chapter.
81