Models Advantages DisadvantagesSpecific-Purpose Models
Visual Understanding Well studied and scalable solutions on
image-level understanding; Emerging
interests and success on region-level
and pixel-level visual understanding
High training cost; No successful scal-
able recipe beyond the billion-image
level
Visual Generation Well studied and scalable solutions
on image-level generation; Emerg-
ing interests and success in control-
lable/customized image generation
High training and inference cost;
Debate between diffusion and auto-
regressive solutions for the best recipe;
More studies are needed for video gen-
eration
General-Purpose Assistants
Unified Vision Models Promises to unlock new emerging ca-
pabilities and scenarios
High risks in modeling and high train-
ing cost
Training with LLM Some new emerging capabilities and
scenarios are enabled with light model
training
The performance is bounded by LLM
Chaining with LLM Fast system development cycles with
low cost as no training is involved
Low flexibility in improving system
performance; No new emerging capa-
bilities
Table 7.1: Comparisons of different multimodal foundation model families covered in this paper.
7.2 Towards Building General-Purpose AI Agents
At the end of each chapter, we have discussed future trends for individual topics. The paper itself
is organized to demonstrate the transition from specialist multimodal foundation models to general-
purpose visual assistants. Though powerful, existing visual assistants such as Flamingo (Alayrac
et al., 2022) and multimodal GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023b) are in the preliminary form, compared with
grand vision on building a general-purpose multimodal AI agent via foundation models. In what
follows, we highlight a number of research trends towards this goal.
Generalist agents with multi-modality. This aligns with the grand goal of building a single gen-
eralist agent that interacts with world like humans through fusing multiple channels such as lan-
guage, vision, speech and actions. From this perspective, the notion of multimodal foundation
models becomes somewhat indistinct on its own. Instead, it serves as a crucial component of the
agent for perceiving and synthesizing visual signals. For example, Gato (Reed et al., 2022) and
PaLM-E (Driess et al., 2023) perform a wide range of language, multimodal and control tasks with
a single set of model weights, where visual perception is a crucial component in understanding the
environment. It also raises challenges in the effective and scalable pre-training objectives for unified
vision and multimodal modeling.
Alignment with human intents. AI alignment research focuses on steering AI systems towards
humans’ intended goals, values, or ethical guidelines. An AI system is deemed aligned when it
effectively promotes the desired goals. Though language has exhibited its generality in expressing
human intents, it is not always the best option. As demonstrated in SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023)
and ControlNet/GLIGEN (Zhang and Agrawala, 2023; Li et al., 2023n), human intents can be more
precisely and conveniently represented in visual prompts such as key points, bounding boxes and
sketch drawing, for visual understanding and generation tasks, respectively. Building foundation
models that are well equipped with such a multimodal human-machine interaction interface is a key
step to unlock new use scenarios, where human intents are best represented visually. For example,
the spatial arrangement of elements within a scene, as well as the artistic style and visual appeal of
a piece of visual art.
Planning, memory, and tool use. It is highlighted in Weng (2023) that a LLM-powered au-
tonomous agent system can be built, where LLM functions as the agent’s brain, complemented
by several key components: planning, memory and tool use. Following the framework, we could
foresee the role of multimodal foundation models in this AI agent system. ( i) Planning. To com-
plete complex tasks in real-world scenarios, the agent should be able to decompose large tasks into
smaller, manageable subgoals, enabling efficient handling of complex tasks. In the ideal case, the
90