(a) MVP
(c) BEiTv2
(b) EVA
(d) Alternative learning between CLIP and MIM
Figure 2.11: Illustration of MVP (Wei et al., 2022b), EV A (Fang et al., 2023) and BEiTv2 (Peng
et al., 2022a). (a) & (b) MVP and EV A directly regress CLIP features for MIM pre-training. (c)
BEiTv2 compresses the information inside CLIP features into discrete visual tokens, and then per-
forming regular BEiT training. (d) Alternative learning between CLIP and MIM. Image credit: Wei
et al. (2022b), Fang et al. (2023), Peng et al. (2022a), Fang et al. (2023).
• UniCL (Yang et al., 2022a) proposes a principled way to use image-label and image-text data
together in a joint image-text-label space for unified contrastive learning, and Florence (Yuan
et al., 2021) is a scaled-up version of UniCL. See Figure 2.10 for an illustration of the framework.
• LiT (Zhai et al., 2022b) uses a pre-trained ViT-g/14 image encoder learned from supervised pre-
training on the JFT-3B dataset, and then makes the image encoder open-vocabulary by learning
an additional text tower via contrastive pre-training on image-text data. Essentially, LiT teaches a
text model to read out good representations from a pre-trained image model for new tasks.
• MOFI (Wu et al., 2023d) proposes to learn image representations from 1 billion noisy entity-
annotated images, and uses both image classification and contrastive losses for model training. For
image classification, entities associated with each image are considered as labels, and supervised
pre-training on a large number of entities is conducted; for constrastive pre-training, entity names
are treated as free-form text, and are further enriched with entity descriptions.
Combining CLIP with image-only (non-)contrastive learning. CLIP can also be enhanced with
image-only self-supervision. Specifically,
• SLIP (Mu et al., 2021) proposes a conceptually simple idea to combine SimCLR (Chen et al.,
2020a) and CLIP for model training, and shows that SLIP outperforms CLIP on both zero-shot
transfer and linear probe settings. DeCLIP (Li et al., 2022g) mines self-supervised learning signals
on each modality to make CLIP training data-efficient. In terms of image supervision, the SimSam
framework (Chen and He, 2021) is used.
• xCLIP (Zhou et al., 2023c) makes CLIP non-contrastive via introducing additional sharpness and
smoothness regularization terms borrowed from the image-only non-contrastive learning litera-
ture. However, the authors show that only non-contrastive pre-training (nCLIP) is not sufficient to
achieve strong performance on zero-shot image classification, and it needs to be combined with
the original CLIP for enhanced performance.
Combining CLIP with MIM. There are recent works that aim to combine CLIP and MIM for
model training. We group them into two categories.
• Shallow interaction. It turns out that image features extracted from CLIP are a good target
for MIM training, as the CLIP image features potentially capture the semantics that are missing
in MIM training. Along this line of work, as shown in Figure 2.11, MVP (Wei et al., 2022b)
22