Figure 3.3: An overview of the latent diffusion model architecture. Image credit: Rombach et al.
(2022).
• Diffusion model. Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song and Ermon, 2020; Ho et al.,
2020) employ stochastic differential equations to evolve random noises into images. A diffusion
model works by initiating the process with a completely random image, and then gradually re-
fining it over multiple iterations in a denoising process. Each iteration predicts and subsequently
removes an element of noise, leading to a continuous evolution of the image, conditioned on the
input texts.
We use Stable Diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al., 2022) as an example to explain in detail how T2I
models work. We choose this model for a variety of reasons. Firstly, SD is one of the most widely
used open-source T2I models, which makes it a solid foundation for many alignment techniques we
discuss in this chapter. Additionally, as a diffusion-based generation model, it serves as an excellent
case study for introducing diffusion models. Finally, its cross-attention-based image-text fusion
mechanism is a classic example of various text-conditioned methods, such as auto-regressive T2I
generation (Yu et al., 2022b), helping us gain an in-depth understand of the image-text interaction
in T2I generation.
Stable Diffusion (SD)1, and its academic version latent diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), contains
mainly three modules, i.e., an image V AE, a denoising U-Net, and a condition encoder, as shown
in the left, center, and right part of Figure 3.3, respectively. We will introduce each module and
the inference flow for image generation, following the notations in the original latent diffusion pa-
per (Rombach et al., 2022).
• V AE.As introduced in the image generation technique overview, the V AE module contains a
paired encoder E and decoder D, trained to encode RGB image x into a latent random variable z
and then decode the latent to best reconstruct the image. Given an RGB imagex ∈ RH×W ×3, the
encoder E encodes it into a continuous latent representation z ∈ Rh×w×c. With the parameters of
H = W = 512, h = w = 64, and c = 4 in SD, latent z is 48 times smaller than image x, thereby
significantly improving the computational efficiency by performing the denoising process in this
compressed compact latent space.
• Text encoder. SD is a conditional image generation model, where the input text condition is en-
coded using a condition encoderτ. Specifically, SD uses the ViT-L/14 CLIP text encoder (Radford
et al., 2021) that encodes the tokenized input text query y into text feature τ(y) ∈ RN ×dτ , where
the maximum length N is 77 and text feature dimension dτ is 768.
• Denoising U-Net. The denoising U-Net is the core module for the diffusion image generation
process. The module is trained to predict the noise ˆϵ(zt, t) to subtract in the latent space at each
denoising timestep t, such that it can step-by-step evolve the initial random noise into a meaningful
image latent. The module is trained with the L2 loss between the predicted noise ˆϵ(zt, t) and the
1We use Stable Diffusion v1 for the introduction. Later versions such as SD2 and SDXL share the same
method but may have different detailed model configurations, such as a larger text encoder, U-Net, and latent
dimension.
30