Figure 3.5: Examples of the dense controls and the corresponding generated images. Image
credit: Zhao et al. (2023b).
Figure 3.6: Qualitative results of inference-time spatial guidance. Image credit: Bansal et al. (2023).
More importantly, it enables the arbitrary compositionality of human subjects, backgrounds, and
dance movements.
Inference-time spatial guidance. The aforementioned works require model training, either the
T2I models or additional modules to understand the extra spatial conditions. Alternatively, stud-
ies (Bansal et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023e) explore providing the inference-time spatial guidance to
T2I models without extra model training. The core idea is similar to classifier guidance (Dhariwal
and Nichol, 2021), which takes a discriminator loss to guide the diffusion process as follows:
ˆϵ′(zt, t) = ˆϵ(zt, t) + s(t) · ▽zt ℓ(c, f(ˆz0)). (3.2)
Taking spatial control as an example, the discriminator can be a Faster-RCNN object detector (Ren
et al., 2015) indicated byf, which operates on the intermediate estimated imageˆz0, and compute the
object detection loss ℓ with the desired layout c, to guide the generation ˆϵ(zt, t). s(t) is the guidance
strength. This approach enables the spatial control in T2I generation without extra training, with
qualitative results shown in Figure 3.6. However, it may not yield results as precise as those from
finetuning methods (Yang et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2023n; Zhang and Agrawala, 2023).
Summary and trends. Early research on spatial controllable generation, such as layout-to-image
and mask-to-image generation, was often treated in parallel with T2I generation. However, with the
emergence of advanced large-scale T2I models, recent studies, as discussed in this subsection, are
now leaning towards integrating spatial conditions with textual conditions. We identify two primary
trends in integrating spatial conditions into T2I models. First, region-controllable T2I generation,
such as ReCo, merges spatial coordinate control into text inputs by enlarging the text vocabulary
with position tokens. Second, studies extended from ControlNet integrate an additional “image-
like” condition to T2I frameworks, thereby capturing a broad spectrum of dense conditions. Moving
forward, T2I models may have a finetuning stage that allows them to comprehend both image and
text inputs. In such a scenario, box coordinates could be incorporated through text, while dense
controls could be provided as image inputs. We will explore and elaborate on this idea in Section 3.5.
3.3 Text-based Editing
Text-to-image editing synthesizes new images from an given image and input text descriptions.
Instead of producing an image entirely from scratch, users might already possess a satisfactory
starting point; this could be an image previously generated from a T2I model or a natural image.
The objective is to retain the majority of the visual content, only modifying specific components.
This could involve altering a local object or the overall image style to precisely match the user’s
intentions. This text-based editing approach offers users a tool to generate fresh images based on a
predecessor, playing a crucial role in creating visual content that accurately follows human intent.
There are various definitions and task setups in text-based editing. We introduce the following repre-
sentative threads. (i) One classic editing scenario is to change a local image region, such as remov-
33