Figure 3.7: Three types of editing (word swap, adding new phrases, attention re-weighting) on
synthetically generated images, enabled by attention map manipulation. Image credit: Hertz et al.
(2022).
ing or changing an object or adding an object in a certain region. Spatially manipulating the latent
in image generation according to the user-generated masks is a simple but effective method (Avra-
hami et al., 2022b,a; Meng et al., 2021). Studies (Balaji et al., 2022; Hertz et al., 2022) also show
that manipulating the image-text cross-attention mask is effective for spatial editing. (ii) Extended
from spatial editing where the language inputs describe the desired appearance in the spatial region,
language can also be used as editing instruction to tell the machine what to do (Kawar et al., 2023;
Brooks et al., 2023), such as “change object A in the image to object B.” (iii) Instead of extending
a single T2I model for editing, editing systems (Wu et al., 2023a) integrate different specialized
modules such as segmentation models (Kirillov et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023b) and large language
models (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023a).
Diffusion process manipulations. The multi-step denoising process in diffusion image generation
naturally supports a certain extent of image editing. Stochastic Differential Editing (SDEdit) (Meng
et al., 2021) shows that first adding noises to the input image to edit and then subsequently denoising
the sample, could produce a meaningful edit. Blended Latent Diffusion (Avrahami et al., 2022a)
shows that the diffusion process manipulation can achieve local object editing with a user-generated
object mask mlatent. In each diffusion step, the latent z is a spatial blend of the foreground and
background latent: z = zf g ⊙ mlatent + zbg ⊙ (1 − mlatent), where zf g is the edited object
generated from the text description and zbg is the original backgrund image with noises added.
However, there are certain limitations on blending spatial latents. Firstly, it may not always
be feasible to require human-generated masks. Secondly, the generation process can sometimes
result in artifacts at the edges. Instead of simply blending the latent in a spatial manner, re-
searchers delve into image-text cross-attention maps to unearth clues for object editing. Specifi-
cally, Prompt2Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022) discovers that cross-attention layers control the interaction
among visual regions and text words. Based on this observation, the study enables three types of
editing for images generated by a diffusion T2I model, including word swap, adding new phrases,
and attention re-weighting, each of which is enabled with corresponding manipulation on the image-
text cross-attention map. Specifically, the Prompt2Prompt tracks both cross-attention maps gener-
ated by the original prompt (namely Mt) and the edited prompt (namely M ∗
t ), and merges the
attention maps with pre-defined rules into the new attention mapscMt, which is used for latent com-
puting. For example, while adding a new phrase, attention map cMt remains unaltered for words
present in the original prompt. It only incorporates the modified attention maps M ∗
t for words that
did not exist in the original prompt. Qualitative results of the edits are shown in Figure 3.7.
Going beyond editing synthetically generated images, Imagic (Kawar et al., 2023) explores editing
real natural images. The core idea is to represent the image to be edited as text embedding, and blend
this embedding with the target text embedding describing the desired image. This blend ensures that
the resulting image retains elements from the original while aligning with the aesthetics detailed in
the target textual prompt. In practice, test-time finetuning is needed to generate high-quality images.
Text instruction editing. Instead of repeating the visual contents of the image to edit in the text
prompts, it might be more efficient for users to directly specify editing instructions using language,
such as “swap sunflowers with roses” in Figure 3.8. The desired text instruction editing model should
work on both model-generated and natural images, and across different types of editing instructions.
InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023) is designed to accept an image and a text editing instruction
to produce an edited version of the input image. The goal is to train an image-to-image model that
can understand such editing text instructions. To achieve this, T2I models can be adapted to ac-
cept the additional image input by incorporating more input channels into the SD’s convolutional
34