Figure 3.14: Illustration of in-context concept customization without test-time finetuning. Image
credit: Chen et al. (2023f).
from text to latent features in the cross-attention layers for concept customization, learned from
multiple sets of concept images. The study facilitates the ability to embed multiple customized
visual concepts in a single text prompt. Instead of learning from multiple sets of input images,
Break-A-Scene (Avrahami et al., 2023a) explores extracting multiple visual concepts in a single
image. The study augments input images with segmentation masks to pinpoint the intended target
concepts and subsequently transforms them into a series of concept embeddings denoted as [Vi].
Customization without test-time finetuning. While the concept customization studies, as de-
scribed above, have achieved good visual quality, the necessity for test-time finetuning hinders
its application in real-world settings. Most end users and application platforms lack the compute
resources required for finetuning, not to mention the complexities of finetuning process. This nat-
urally leads to the question: can we take concept images as input conditions, and achieve concept
customization without finetuning?
The input/output format of the imagined system is similar to the retrieval-augmented genera-
tion (Chen et al., 2022f), which aims to ease the image generation by conditioning on a retrieved
similar image. The system supports extra image inputs that contain relevant information for the
generation process. By altering the conditioning images during the training phase, the model can
potentially achieve a broad in-context learning capability, producing images that align with the given
input examples. In line with this framework, SuTI (Chen et al., 2023f) trains a single model to imitate
the finetuned subject-specific experts, and generates images conditioning on both text and subject
input images, as shown in Figure 3.14. As a result, the trained model can perform in-context concept
customization without test-time finetuning, and generalize to unseen subjects and descriptions. An-
other concurrent work, InstantBooth (Shi et al., 2023a), also shows remarkable results in generating
images that are not only aligned with language but also preserve identities, with a single forward
pass.
Summary and trends. The field of visual concept customization has advanced from finetuning em-
beddings during the testing stage, to directly performing in-context image generation with a frozen
model. The in-context generation pipeline, which incorporates additional image inputs, shows re-
markable potentials in real-world applications. In this subsection, we have explored two applications
of this approach: facilitating generation through the retrieval of pertinent images (Chen et al., 2022f),
and personalizing visual concepts by conditioning them on subject images (Chen et al., 2023f; Shi
et al., 2023a). An intriguing direction is to unify the diverse uses of image inputs, directed by
descriptive textual instructions. We elaborate on this idea in the following sub-section.
39