Instruction TuningInputOutputTranslation
Summarization
Hello, Vancouver
 CVPRis the premier annual computer vision event comprising the main conference and several co-located workshops and short courses.This year,CVPRwill be single track such that everyone (with full passport registration) can attend everything.
CVPR: top computer vision event, single-track, accessible to all.
•Task instructions are implicit.•Individual models are trained, or multi-tasking without specifying the instructions•Hard to generalize to new tasks in zero-shot
(a) Training: Implicit task instructions in traditional language data.
Instruction TuningInputOutput
Summarize in just 10 words to make the messageeven more brief and easier to remember.
Instruction Hello, Vancouver
 CVPRis the premier annual computer vision event comprising the main conference and several co-located workshops and short courses.This year,CVPRwill be single track such that everyone (with full passport registration) can attend everything.
CVPR: top computer vision event, single-track, accessible to all.
Translate English into Simplified Chinese
•Task instructions are explicit, expressed in natural language•One single model is trained, multi-tasking with specified instructions•Natural and easy to generalize to new tasks in zero-shot
(b) Training: Explicit task instructions in instructional language data.
Instruction TuningInputOutput
Summarize in Chinese to make it easier to remember. 
Instruction 
CVPR'23: 

"CVPR'23 visa issue: organizing committee works to solve and provide virtual and in-person registration switch services."
(c) Inference: Explicit task instructions in instructional language data. The English meaning of the
output is “CVPR’23 visa issue: organizing committee works to solve and provide virtual and in-
person registration switch services. ”
Figure 5.6: Examples of task instructions in traditional and instructional language data, respectively.
text, and ask LLM such as GPT-3 or GPT-4 to create more instructions and responses that follow the
requirements stated in the prompt. The machine-generated instruction-following data can be further
selected to construct with the prompt for in-context-learning in the next data generation iteration.
The procedure iterates until a given number of samples are collected. Due to the relatively lower
cost and higher response speed of API calls (compared with human annotations), self-instruct is
becoming more favorable in the research community.
5.2.2 Self-Instruct and Open-Source LLMs
Self-Instruct Tuning
Seed ExamplesIn-Context LearningNew Machine-Generated Examples
qHuman-Human: Collected from humans with high cost qHuman-Machine: A Strong LLM Teacher such as GPT3 and GPT4
How to collect a diverse set of high-quality instructions and their responses?
Please generate new instructions that meet the requirements: ….translation example summarization example 
Figure 5.7: Illustration of the self-instruct pipeline (Wang et al., 2022e).
The open-source community has witnessed a surge of open LLMs. The success of ChatGPT (Ope-
nAI, 2022) and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023a) offers tremendous opportunities to improve open-source
LLMs using instruction-tuning. Figure 5.8 compares several open-source instruction-tuned LLMs.
LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023) is a series of open-sourced LLMs, which match the performance of
66