Instruction Tuning with Open-Source LLMs
Data Source
18
AlpacaVicunaLLaMA
GPT-3.5ShareGPT(Human & GPT)
None
Self-Instruct with Strong Teacher LLMs & Mixed Human Data
52K52K500K(~150K conversions)Instruction-following Data (#Turns)
GPT-4(text-only)
GPT4-Alpaca
Mixed Data
Tulu
…
…
…
How Far Can Camels Go? Exploring the State of Instruction Tuning on Open Resource
Figure 5.8: Model examples of the LLaMA family.
proprietary LLMs such as GPT-3. To teach LLaMA to follow instructions, Self-instruct tuning has
been quickly adopted given its superior performance and low cost. For example, to name a few
early attempts in this line of research, Stanford Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023) uses 52K instruction-
following samples generated by GPT-3.5, while Vicuna (Vicuna, 2023) uses around 500K high-
quality instruction-following samples (150K conversions) between user and GPT (ShareGPT, 2023).
To advance the SoTA of instruction-tuning for LLMs, Peng et al. (2023a) uses GPT-4 as the teacher
to generate the responses to the Alpaca instructions. Many follow-up works (Zhang et al., 2023i)
improve the instruction-following data to enable the open LLMs with better alignment quality in
chat. For a comprehensive review, we refer the readers to a recent paper (Wang et al., 2023k),
where a LLM Tulu is trained on a mix of several high-quality instruction data, and comprehensive
comparisons are conducted across multiple benchmarks.
Quick assessment of LLM chatbots. To study the quality of LLM Chatbots, we considerVicuna-
Instructions-801 (Vicuna, 2023), a dataset with 80 questions that baseline models (Touvron et al.,
2023) find challenging. Besides generic instructions, the instructions fall into 8 categories, including
knowledge, math, Fermi, counterfactual, roleplay, generic, coding, writing and common-sense. To
quantitatively compare the performance, GPT-4 is used to rate the response from score 1 to 10 for any
two given chatbots, then compute the relative score. Surprisingly, it turns out this evaluation metric is
quite consistent across different settings. The open-source LLaMA family seems to perform closely
to SoTA proprietary chatbots.
Further discussions. There are several important topics on LLMs that we have not covered in this
chapter, but are worthwhile future exploring.
• Data-centric AI . We emphasize that the development of these open-source LLMs is data-
centric (Mazumder et al., 2022), rather than model-centric, so that we hope the readers could
align with this perspective when discussing the topic. As the training objectives and network
architectures are becoming similar or even identical to GPT-like models, the key differential
factor is data. For example, behaviors of the aforementioned LLMs are determined by the
instruction tuning data.
• False promise? There is a debate on that the open LLMs could catch up with the proprietary
LLMs is a false promise (Gudibande et al., 2023). To align the discussions, we argue that there
are two distinctive abilities for LLMs: the instruction-following ability to know which task
to perform, and massive knowledge storage to complete the task with high quality. Imitation
models are good at the former, by mimicking ChatGPT’s style but perform poorly in terms of
factuality in their responses. In Gudibande et al. (2023), the authors conclude that there exists
a substantial capabilities gap between open and closed LLMs that, with current methods, can
only be bridged using an unwieldy amount of imitation data or by using more capable base
LLMs. They also advocate that the highest leverage action for improving open-source models
is to tackle the difficult challenge of developing better base LLMs. However, unfortunately,
the resources to train such base LLMs are only available in a few industry labs. It seems more
1https://github.com/lm-sys/FastChat/blob/main/fastchat/eval/table/question.jsonl
67