promising for most academic research labs to explore the opportunities in alignment research
with affordable resources, or explore the techniques to reduce the compute barriers.
• Base LLMs. Developing more capable or commercial usable LLMs is of great value. Besides
LLaMA, the open-source community has developed variants of base LLMs such as LLaMA-2,
OpenLLaMA (Geng and Liu, 2023), MPT (Team, 2023) and Falcon (Penedo et al., 2023), or
released the training recipe (Computer, 2023).
5.3 Instruction-Tuned Large Multimodal Models
In this section, we illustrate how to build the minimum prototype of multimodal GPT-4 with open-
source resources. Specially, we use LLaV A (Liu et al., 2023c) as the running example, a similar idea
is also proposed in its con-current work MiniGPT-4 (Zhu et al., 2023a).
The research in the multimodal space has often been inspired by the latest advances in NLP in
recent years. One successful recipe is to explore what would happen if the most intriguing and suc-
cessful NLP ideas are borrowed for the vision-and-language community, for example, self-instruct.
However, the unique challenge with self-instruct in multimodal research is that there is no strong
multimodal teacher publicly available. Therefore, the research question becomes: how can we use
language models such as language-only GPT-4 to create multimodal instruction following data.
Data Creation
Instead of directly feeding images into OpenAI GPT-4, we use their symbolic sequence representa-
tions shown in Figure 5.9 (a). In LLaV A, both captions and bounding boxes are considered, due to
the following reasons: (i) it is empirically found that GPT-4 can understand both well, in contrast to
the poor performance of ChatGPT in understanding bounding box coordinates. (ii) They are often
complementary to each other and hence can represent the image as informative as possible.
As shown in Figure 5.9 (b), three types of instruction-following data are considered: (i) multi-
turn conversations so that users can chat with the model; (ii) detailed description so that long-form
responses can be generated from the model; and (iii) complex reasoning, which is more about the
implication of the image, rather than the image content. For example, “what challenge do these
people face?”, which requires to first recognize that the image is about a SUV in the parking area,
and there are quite a few luggage placed on the ground, and then to infer that the challenge is how
the luggage can be packed into the SUV due to the tight space of the trunk. In total, 158K samples
are collected over three types. To summarize, the spirit is that whatever tasks one wants the model
to perform in the serving stage, it is important to create the corresponding instruction-following data
for training.
Network Architecture and Training
As illustrated in Figure 5.10, the network architecture of LLaV A is an instantiation of the general
image-to-text generative model framework introduced in Figure 5.1 of Section 5.1. Specifically,
LLaVa connects the pre-trained CLIP ViT-L/14 visual encoder (Radford et al., 2021) and large lan-
guage model Vicuna (Vicuna, 2023), via a simple projection matrix (i.e., the linear projection layer).
A two-stage instruction-tuning procedure is adopted to train the model. (i) Stage 1: pre-training for
feature alignment. Only the projection matrix is updated, based on a subset of CC3M (Changpinyo
et al., 2021). (ii) Stage 2: finetuning end-to-end. Both the projection matrix and LLM are updated
on the proposed multimodal instruction-following data for daily user-oriented applications.
Performance
Visual chat: towards building multimodal GPT-4 level chatbot. LLaV A is finetuned on the gen-
erated multimodal instruction-following data, which contains a diverse set of task instructions and
responses for daily user-oriented applications. It is empirically observed that finetuning the linear
projection layer only is sufficient for the chat demo/scenarios, though it requires longer training time.
To evaluate the model performance, an evaluation dataset named LLaV A-Bench is constructed, with
two subsets: (i) LLaV A-Bench (COCO): 30 unseen COCO images with 90 new language-image
instructions, (ii) LLaV A-Bench (In-the-Wild): 24 images with 60 questions. Each image can be as-
sociated with three types of instructions: conversation, detailed description and complex reasoning.
68