Upgrading LLM. The system design of MM-R EACT allows for upgrading the core part of the
system, the LLM, to newer and more powerful models as they come out, without the need of re-
training. We show an example in Figure 6.8 on upgrading ChatGPT to language-only GPT-4,
which improves MM-R EACT to potentially match the performance of multimodal GPT-4.
Plug-and-play (adding more tools). Existing multimodal agents incorporates tools via a plug-
and-play mechanism, allowing adding more tools without training. One prominent work along this
direction is HuggingGPT (Shen et al., 2023b), which proposes to leverage all open-source models
hosted on huggingface. Chameleon (Lu et al., 2023b), incorporates not only huggingface models,
but also open-source models from GitHub, Bing search API, and python compiler. RestGPT (Song
et al., 2023) proposes a multi-level online planning framework that effectively handles the practical
challenges associated with integrating LLMs with more than 100 RESTful APIs. However, it re-
mains challenging in scaling this framework to thousands to millions of tools, which is the potential
future demonstrated in TaskMatrix.AI (Liang et al., 2023b).
Moreover, one can leverage SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) as a tool to allow for more types of human
interaction with the multimodal agent other than text. Recall in MM-R EACT, the user intent is all
captured by the natural language query from the user. In InternGPT (Liu et al., 2023l), by connecting
the tool SAM with GPT, it allows for more ways to interact with the system, for example, via clicks,
scribbles, and drawing bounding boxes. These additional interactions, to some extent, are mimicking
the action of finger-pointing when we humans are having a conversation.
6.4 Advanced Topics
In this section, we discuss more advanced topics and shed light on potential future directions.
6.4.1 Comparison to Training with LLM in Chapter 5
We have covered two directions on building advanced multimodal systems based on LLMs. As the
key distinction, the multimodal agents in this chapter leverages LLMs’ high-level planning abilities
to allocate various multimodal tools, while training multimodal models with LLMs in Chapter 5
solely leverages LLMs for text generation conditioned on multimodal inputs.
Nonetheless, both of these methods exhibit their respective advantages and disadvantages. On one
hand, instruction tuning enables an end-to-end model that directly interprets rich semantics in multi-
modal inputs, but requires data curation and training, hence more computationally expensive. How-
ever, limited instruction tuning data may limit its capabilities in certain scenarios, such as OCR.
On the other hand, one can build a multimodal agent without any training by chaining LLMs with
abundant off-the-shelf models/APIs/code interpreters as tools, and leveraging in-context few-shot
examples to teach LLMs on planning. However, as there is no training, the system may fail to in-
voke the right tool. Moreover, weak domain experts may produce noisy outputs, that can confuse
LLM on planning or reasoning, leading to weak performance.
Though these two approaches exhibit distinct variations,, we envision the possibility of an interme-
diate domain that amalgamates the strengths of both paradigms, and raise the following questions.
Now that we have open-source LMM such as LLaV A (Liu et al., 2023c), can we replace the LLM
with LLaV A as the tool allocator? If so, what capabilities would require a tool to be enabled? And
what problems can be solved by instruction tuning. These are interesting directions that may worth
exploring in the near future.
6.4.2 Improving Multimodal Agents
Existing multimodal agents mainly rely on in-context few-shot examples to teach LLM on planning,
which can be unreliable, leading to inaccurate tool using. To improve the accuracy in planning,
several works have been proposed and we group them into three categories below.
Composing tools via code generation. Most existing multimodal agents uses natural language
to prompt LLM for planning which tool to use. Researchers (Gupta and Kembhavi, 2023; Sur ´ıs
et al., 2023) have also been exploring using programming language for more accurate execution.
Visual programming (Gupta and Kembhavi, 2023) is a prominent work along this direction, which
85