uses the in-context learning ability of GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) to generate python-like modular
programs from natural language instructions for compositional visual tasks ViperGPT Sur ´ıs et al.
(2023) instructs GPT-3 Codex (Chen et al., 2021a) to generate Python code to compose multimodal
tools for a one-round query answering. However, as the codes are still generated by a LLM, the
problem of inaccurate tool using still remains.
Improving accuracy in tool using: self-assessment. A recent work AssistGPT (Gao et al., 2023a)
tries to improve the accuracy in tool using via self-assessment. It adds a stage of inspection and
learning loop into the system. When the round of plan and execution is finished, the system inspects
the outcome, and determines whether the reasoning path of calling the tool is a success or not, if so,
save it as an in-context example, to teach LLM for a more accurate tool calling in the future rounds.
Improving accuracy in tool using: instruction tuning. Another thread on improving accuracy
in tool using is to combine the system with instruction tuning (Patil et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023c).
One can generate a dataset of instruction-API pairs via self-instruct to tune a smaller LLM ( e.g. ,
Vicuna-7B (Vicuna, 2023)).
LMM as the tool allocator? In addition, as LMMs evolve, we envision that the LLM can be
replaced by a LMM as the tool allocator in the system, to enable even more advanced application
scenarios. If the tool allocator can take multimodal inputs, there is no need to unify the outputs of
tools into text sequence, allowing more natural interactions between the tool allocator and multi-
modal tools, particularly those producing multimodal outputs. For instance, one can imagine using
multimodal GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023a) to coordinate various image or video generation tools to make a
short movie by providing it with a sketch of the storyline and visual examples of the main characters.
6.4.3 Diverse Applications of Multimodal Agents
By composing tools from a specific domain, this new system paradigm can also support diverse
domain-specific applications.
Yu et al. (2023b) composes LLMs with image synthesis tools and object-level/pixel-level image un-
derstanding tools to build a data synthesis pipeline to provide diverse annotations on synthesized
image. Instruct2Act (Huang et al., 2023c) complements the LLM with robotic executors, to enable
robotic actions based on multi-modal instructions. When chaining a pool of audio models with
LLM, AudioGPT (Huang et al., 2023a) can understand and generate speech, music, sound and talk-
ing head. Similarly, WavJourney (Liu et al., 2023i) further supports compositional audio creation
with storylines encompassing speech, music, and sound effects. With tracking, captioning, audio un-
derstanding models, ChatVideo (Wang et al., 2023c) enables ChatGPT to understand multi-channel
videos. Other application scenarios include 3D scene generation (Lin et al., 2023; Feng et al., 2023),
medical image understanding (Liu and Zuo, 2023; Sun et al., 2023c) and vision-language naviga-
tion (Zhou et al., 2023b).
Figure 6.9: Example of evaluation benchmark focusing on toll using accuracy.
86