AI agent possesses the self-improvement ability, engaging in self-assessment and introspection re-
garding previous actions, enabling it to learn from errors and enhance its approach for subsequent
endeavors, ultimately leading to better outcomes. Visual modality is a common channel to represent
state of the environment. To facilitate planning, it raises challenges in improving the capability of
the current visual understanding models in perceiving more fine-grained visual details and longer
sequence videos. (ii) Memory. For short-term memory, in-context learning (or prompt engineering)
is utilized as short-term memory for the model to learn. Interleaved multimodal prompts can enable
new scenarios to clarify the human intents. For long-term memory, it provides the agent with the
capability to recall external knowledge over extended sessions, which can be implemented by fast
retrieving from a multi-modal vector space (Liu et al., 2023d). In term of modeling, foundation
models are required to learn the new skills to effectively leverage both types of memory. ( iii) Tool
use. The agent learns to utilize external APIs for knowledge that is missing from the foundation
model weights. New capabilities are required to deal with the vision modality in several scenar-
ios. For example, based on both the input visual signal and instructions, the model decides and
plans whether certain external APIs are needed to complete the goal, such as code execution of
detection/segmentation/OCR/generator experts.
The field of multimodal foundation models is evolving at a rapid speed, with new directions/methods
emerging frequently. There are many important research topics that are not discussed in this paper,
mostly due to the daily-updated research innovation. We are optimistic about the future of mul-
timodal foundation models, not only because we are convinced that foreseeable exciting research
innovations/ideas in individual areas are becoming reality by following the path of LLM in the near
future, but also because connecting computer vision with the broader AI community, and building
general-purpose AI agents is going to significantly advance the daily life of human being.
91