10
introduces an innovative method for integrating knowledge
into white-box models via directive fine-tuning [75]. In this
approach, the retriever module is directly substituted to gen-
erate relevant documents according to a query. This method
assists in addressing the difficulties encountered during the
fine-tuning process and enhances model performance.
IV. G ENERATION
After retrieval, it is not a good practice to directly input all
the retrieved information to the LLM for answering questions.
Following will introduce adjustments from two perspectives:
adjusting the retrieved content and adjusting the LLM.
A. Context Curation
Redundant information can interfere with the final gener-
ation of LLM, and overly long contexts can also lead LLM
to the “Lost in the middle” problem [98]. Like humans, LLM
tends to only focus on the beginning and end of long texts,
while forgetting the middle portion. Therefore, in the RAG
system, we typically need to further process the retrieved
content.
1) Reranking: Reranking fundamentally reorders document
chunks to highlight the most pertinent results first, effectively
reducing the overall document pool, severing a dual purpose
in information retrieval, acting as both an enhancer and a
filter, delivering refined inputs for more precise language
model processing [70]. Reranking can be performed using
rule-based methods that depend on predefined metrics like
Diversity, Relevance, and MRR, or model-based approaches
like Encoder-Decoder models from the BERT series (e.g.,
SpanBERT), specialized reranking models such as Cohere
rerank or bge-raranker-large, and general large language mod-
els like GPT [12], [99].
2) Context Selection/Compression: A common misconcep-
tion in the RAG process is the belief that retrieving as many
relevant documents as possible and concatenating them to form
a lengthy retrieval prompt is beneficial. However, excessive
context can introduce more noise, diminishing the LLM’s
perception of key information .
(Long) LLMLingua [100], [101] utilize small language
models (SLMs) such as GPT-2 Small or LLaMA-7B, to
detect and remove unimportant tokens, transforming it into
a form that is challenging for humans to comprehend but
well understood by LLMs. This approach presents a direct
and practical method for prompt compression, eliminating the
need for additional training of LLMs while balancing language
integrity and compression ratio. PRCA tackled this issue by
training an information extractor [69]. Similarly, RECOMP
adopts a comparable approach by training an information
condenser using contrastive learning [71]. Each training data
point consists of one positive sample and five negative sam-
ples, and the encoder undergoes training using contrastive loss
throughout this process [102] .
In addition to compressing the context, reducing the num-
ber of documents aslo helps improve the accuracy of the
model’s answers. Ma et al. [103] propose the “Filter-Reranker”
paradigm, which combines the strengths of LLMs and SLMs.
In this paradigm, SLMs serve as filters, while LLMs function
as reordering agents. The research shows that instructing
LLMs to rearrange challenging samples identified by SLMs
leads to significant improvements in various Information
Extraction (IE) tasks. Another straightforward and effective
approach involves having the LLM evaluate the retrieved
content before generating the final answer. This allows the
LLM to filter out documents with poor relevance through LLM
critique. For instance, in Chatlaw [104], the LLM is prompted
to self-suggestion on the referenced legal provisions to assess
their relevance.
B. LLM Fine-tuning
Targeted fine-tuning based on the scenario and data char-
acteristics on LLMs can yield better results. This is also one
of the greatest advantages of using on-premise LLMs. When
LLMs lack data in a specific domain, additional knowledge can
be provided to the LLM through fine-tuning. Huggingface’s
fine-tuning data can also be used as an initial step.
Another benefit of fine-tuning is the ability to adjust the
model’s input and output. For example, it can enable LLM to
adapt to specific data formats and generate responses in a par-
ticular style as instructed [37]. For retrieval tasks that engage
with structured data, the SANTA framework [76] implements
a tripartite training regimen to effectively encapsulate both
structural and semantic nuances. The initial phase focuses on
the retriever, where contrastive learning is harnessed to refine
the query and document embeddings.
Aligning LLM outputs with human or retriever preferences
through reinforcement learning is a potential approach. For
instance, manually annotating the final generated answers
and then providing feedback through reinforcement learning.
In addition to aligning with human preferences, it is also
possible to align with the preferences of fine-tuned models
and retrievers [79]. When circumstances prevent access to
powerful proprietary models or larger parameter open-source
models, a simple and effective method is to distill the more
powerful models(e.g. GPT-4). Fine-tuning of LLM can also
be coordinated with fine-tuning of the retriever to align pref-
erences. A typical approach, such as RA-DIT [27], aligns the
scoring functions between Retriever and Generator using KL
divergence.
V. A UGMENTATION PROCESS IN RAG
In the domain of RAG, the standard practice often involves
a singular (once) retrieval step followed by generation, which
can lead to inefficiencies and sometimes is typically insuffi-
cient for complex problems demanding multi-step reasoning,
as it provides a limited scope of information [105]. Many
studies have optimized the retrieval process in response to this
issue, and we have summarised them in Figure 5.
A. Iterative Retrieval
Iterative retrieval is a process where the knowledge base
is repeatedly searched based on the initial query and the text
generated so far, providing a more comprehensive knowledge