8
the appropriate retrieval granularity during inference can be
a simple and effective strategy to improve the retrieval and
downstream task performance of dense retrievers.
In text, retrieval granularity ranges from fine to coarse,
including Token, Phrase, Sentence, Proposition, Chunks, Doc-
ument. Among them, DenseX [30]proposed the concept of
using propositions as retrieval units. Propositions are defined
as atomic expressions in the text, each encapsulating a unique
factual segment and presented in a concise, self-contained nat-
ural language format. This approach aims to enhance retrieval
precision and relevance. On the Knowledge Graph (KG),
retrieval granularity includes Entity, Triplet, and sub-Graph.
The granularity of retrieval can also be adapted to downstream
tasks, such as retrieving Item IDs [40]in recommendation tasks
and Sentence pairs [38]. Detailed information is illustrated in
Table I.
B. Indexing Optimization
In the Indexing phase, documents will be processed, seg-
mented, and transformed into Embeddings to be stored in a
vector database. The quality of index construction determines
whether the correct context can be obtained in the retrieval
phase.
1) Chunking Strategy: The most common method is to split
the document into chunks on a fixed number of tokens (e.g.,
100, 256, 512) [88]. Larger chunks can capture more context,
but they also generate more noise, requiring longer processing
time and higher costs. While smaller chunks may not fully
convey the necessary context, they do have less noise. How-
ever, chunks leads to truncation within sentences, prompting
the optimization of a recursive splits and sliding window meth-
ods, enabling layered retrieval by merging globally related
information across multiple retrieval processes [89]. Never-
theless, these approaches still cannot strike a balance between
semantic completeness and context length. Therefore, methods
like Small2Big have been proposed, where sentences (small)
are used as the retrieval unit, and the preceding and following
sentences are provided as (big) context to LLMs [90].
2) Metadata Attachments: Chunks can be enriched with
metadata information such as page number, file name, au-
thor,category timestamp. Subsequently, retrieval can be filtered
based on this metadata, limiting the scope of the retrieval.
Assigning different weights to document timestamps during
retrieval can achieve time-aware RAG, ensuring the freshness
of knowledge and avoiding outdated information.
In addition to extracting metadata from the original doc-
uments, metadata can also be artificially constructed. For
example, adding summaries of paragraph, as well as intro-
ducing hypothetical questions. This method is also known as
Reverse HyDE. Specifically, using LLM to generate questions
that can be answered by the document, then calculating the
similarity between the original question and the hypothetical
question during retrieval to reduce the semantic gap between
the question and the answer.
3) Structural Index: One effective method for enhancing
information retrieval is to establish a hierarchical structure for
the documents. By constructing In structure, RAG system can
expedite the retrieval and processing of pertinent data.
Hierarchical index structure . File are arranged in parent-
child relationships, with chunks linked to them. Data sum-
maries are stored at each node, aiding in the swift traversal
of data and assisting the RAG system in determining which
chunks to extract. This approach can also mitigate the illusion
caused by block extraction issues.
Knowledge Graph index . Utilize KG in constructing the
hierarchical structure of documents contributes to maintaining
consistency. It delineates the connections between different
concepts and entities, markedly reducing the potential for
illusions. Another advantage is the transformation of the
information retrieval process into instructions that LLM can
comprehend, thereby enhancing the accuracy of knowledge
retrieval and enabling LLM to generate contextually coherent
responses, thus improving the overall efficiency of the RAG
system. To capture the logical relationship between document
content and structure, KGP [91] proposed a method of building
an index between multiple documents using KG. This KG
consists of nodes (representing paragraphs or structures in the
documents, such as pages and tables) and edges (indicating
semantic/lexical similarity between paragraphs or relationships
within the document structure), effectively addressing knowl-
edge retrieval and reasoning problems in a multi-document
environment.
C. Query Optimization
One of the primary challenges with Naive RAG is its
direct reliance on the user’s original query as the basis for
retrieval. Formulating a precise and clear question is difficult,
and imprudent queries result in subpar retrieval effectiveness.
Sometimes, the question itself is complex, and the language
is not well-organized. Another difficulty lies in language
complexity ambiguity. Language models often struggle when
dealing with specialized vocabulary or ambiguous abbrevi-
ations with multiple meanings. For instance, they may not
discern whether “LLM” refers to large language model or a
Master of Laws in a legal context.
1) Query Expansion: Expanding a single query into mul-
tiple queries enriches the content of the query, providing
further context to address any lack of specific nuances, thereby
ensuring the optimal relevance of the generated answers.
Multi-Query. By employing prompt engineering to expand
queries via LLMs, these queries can then be executed in
parallel. The expansion of queries is not random, but rather
meticulously designed.
Sub-Query. The process of sub-question planning represents
the generation of the necessary sub-questions to contextualize
and fully answer the original question when combined. This
process of adding relevant context is, in principle, similar
to query expansion. Specifically, a complex question can be
decomposed into a series of simpler sub-questions using the
least-to-most prompting method [92].
Chain-of-Verification(CoVe). The expanded queries undergo
validation by LLM to achieve the effect of reducing halluci-
nations. Validated expanded queries typically exhibit higher
reliability [93].