Figure 1.2: Illustration of three representative problems that multimodal foundation mod-
els aim to solve in this paper: visual understanding tasks , visual generation tasks , and
general-purpose interface with language understanding and generation.
yet incomplete character: homogenization of the methodologies across research communities and
emergence of new capabilities. From a technical perspective, it istransfer learning that makes foun-
dation models possible, and it is scale that makes them powerful. The emergence of foundation
models has been predominantly observed in the NLP domain, with examples ranging from BERT
to ChatGPT. This trend has gained traction in recent years, extending to computer vision and other
fields. In NLP, the introduction of BERT in late 2018 is considered as the inception of the foundation
model era. The remarkable success of BERT rapidly stimulates interest in self-supervised learning
in the computer vision community, giving rise to models such as SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020a),
MoCo (He et al., 2020), BEiT (Bao et al., 2022), and MAE (He et al., 2022a). During the same time
period, the success of pre-training also significantly promotes the vision-and-language multimodal
field to an unprecedented level of attention.
In this paper, we focus on multimodal foundation models, which inherit all properties of foundation
models discussed in the Stanford paper (Bommasani et al., 2021), but with an emphasis on models
with the capability to deal with vision and vision-language modalities. Among the ever-growing
literature, we categorize multimodal foundation models in Figure 1.2, based on their functional-
ity and generality. For each category, we present exemplary models that demonstrate the primary
capabilities inherent to these multimodal foundation models.
• Visual Understanding Models. (Highlighted with orange in Figure 1.2) Learning general visual
representations is essential to build vision foundation models, as pre-training a strong vision back-
bone is foundamental to all types of computer vision downstream tasks, ranging from image-level
(e.g., image classification, retrieval, and captioning), region-level (e.g., detection and grounding)
to pixel-level tasks (e.g., segmentation). We group the methods into three categories, depending
on the types of supervision signals used to train the models.
– Label supervision. Datasets like ImageNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and ImageNet21K (Rid-
nik et al., 2021) have been popular for supervised learning, and larger-scale proprietary datasets
are also used in industrial labs (Sun et al., 2017; Singh et al., 2022b; Zhai et al., 2022a).
– Language supervision. Language is a richer form of supervision. Models like CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021) and ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021) are pre-trained using a contrastive loss over millions
or even billions of noisy image-text pairs mined from the Web. These models enable zero-
shot image classification, and make traditional computer vision (CV) models to perform open-
7