Figure 2.10: Overview of UniCL (Yang et al., 2022a) that performs unified contrastive pre-training
on image-text and image-label data. Image credit: Yang et al. (2022a).
typically used when the targets are discrete tokens, while ℓ1, ℓ2, or cosine similarity losses are
common choices for pixel values or continuous-valued features.
MIM for video pre-training. Naturally, there are recent works on extending MIM to video
pre-training. Prominent examples include BEVT (Wang et al., 2022c), MAE as spatiotemporal
learner (Feichtenhofer et al., 2022), VideoMAE (Tong et al., 2022), and VideoMAEv2 (Wang et al.,
2023e). Taking Feichtenhofer et al. (2022) as an example. This paper studies a conceptually simple
extension of MAE to video pre-training via randomly masking out space-time patches in videos and
learns an autoencoder to reconstruct them in pixels. Interestingly, the authors found that MAE learns
strong video representations with almost no inductive bias on space-time, and spacetime-agnostic
random masking performs the best, with an optimal masking ratio as high as 90%.
Lack of learning global image representations. MIM is an effective pre-training method that
provides a good parameter initialization for further model finetuning. However, the vanilla MIM
pre-trained model does not learn a global image representation. In iBOT (Zhou et al., 2021), the
authors propose to enhance BEiT (Bao et al., 2022) with a DINO-like self-distillation loss (Caron
et al., 2021) to force the [CLS] token to learn global image representations. The same idea has been
extended to DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023).
Scaling properties of MIM. MIM is scalable in terms of model size. For example, we can per-
form MIM pre-training of a vision transformer with billions of parameters. However, the scaling
property with regard to data size is less clear. There are some recent works that aim to understand
the data scaling of MIM (Xie et al., 2023b; Lu et al., 2023a); however, the data scale is limited to
millions of images, rather than billions, except Singh et al. (2023) that studies the effectiveness of
MAE as a so-called “pre-pretraining” method for billion-scale data. Generally, MIM can be con-
sidered an effective regularization method that helps initialize a billion-scale vision transformer for
downstream tasks; however, whether or not scaling the MIM pre-training to billion-scale image-only
data requires further exploration.
2.5 Synergy Among Different Learning Approaches
Till now, we have reviewed different approaches to pre-training image backbones, especially for vi-
sion transformers. Below, we use CLIP as the anchor point, and discuss how CLIP can be combined
with other learning methods.
Combining CLIP with label supervision. Noisy labels and text supervision can be jointly used
for image backbone pre-training. Some representative works are discussed below.
21