Figure 2.12: Overview of BEiT-3 that performs masked data modeling on both image/text and joint
image-text data via a multiway transformer. Image credit: Wang et al. (2022d).
proposes to regress CLIP features directly, while BEiTv2 (Peng et al., 2022a) first compresses the
information inside CLIP features into discrete visual tokens, and then performs regular BEiT train-
ing. Similar use of CLIP features as MIM training target has also been investigated in EV A (Fang
et al., 2023), CAEv2 (Zhang et al., 2022c), and MaskDistill (Peng et al., 2022b). In EV A-02 (Fang
et al., 2023), the authors advocate alternative learning of MIM and CLIP representations. Specifi-
cally, an off-the-shelf CLIP model is used to provide a feature target for MIM training; while the
MIM pre-trained image backbone is used to initialize CLIP training. The MIM representations
are used to finetune various downstream tasks while the learned frozen CLIP embedding enables
zero-shot image classification and other applications.
• Deeper integration. However, instead of using CLIP as targets for MIM training, if one aims to
combine CLIP and MIM for joint model training, MIM does not seem to improve a CLIP model
at scale (Weers et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023m).
• Although the combination of CLIP and MIM does not lead to a promising result at the current
stage, the combination of BERT and BEiT is very promising, as evidenced in BEiT-3 (Wang et al.,
2022d) (see Figure 2.12), where the authors show that masked data modeling can be performed
on both image/text and joint image-text data via the design of a multiway transformer, and state-
of-the-art performance can be achieved on a wide range of vision and vision-language tasks.
2.6 Multimodal Fusion, Region-Level and Pixel-Level Pre-training
Till now, we have focused on the methods of pre-training image backbones from scratch, but not
on pre-training methods that power multimodal fusion, region-level and pixel-level image under-
standing. These methods typically use a pre-trained image encoder at the first hand to perform a
second-stage pre-training. Below, we briefly discuss these topics.
2.6.1 From Multimodal Fusion to Multimodal LLM
For dual encoders such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), image and text are encoded separately, and
modality interaction is only handled via a simple dot product of image and text feature vectors. This
can be very effective for zero-shot image classification and image-text retrieval. However, due to
the lack of deep multimodal fusion, CLIP alone performs poorly on the image captioning (Vinyals
et al., 2015) and visual question answering (Antol et al., 2015) tasks. This requires the pre-training
of a fusion encoder, where additional transformer layers are typically employed to model the deep
interaction between image and text representations. Below, we review how these fusion-encoder
pre-training methods are developed over time.
OD-based models. Most early methods use pre-trained object detectors (ODs) to extract visual
features. Among them, ViLBERT (Lu et al., 2019) and LXMERT (Tan and Bansal, 2019) use co-
attention for multimodal fusion, while methods like VisualBERT (Li et al., 2019b), Unicoder-VL (Li
et al., 2020a), VL-BERT (Su et al., 2019), UNITER (Chen et al., 2020d), OSCAR (Li et al., 2020b),
23