Chapter 3
Visual Generation
Visual generation aims to generate high-fidelity visual content, including images, videos, neural ra-
diance fields, 3D point clouds, etc.. This topic is at the core of recently popular artificial intelligence
generated content (AIGC), and this ability is crucial in supporting creative applications such as de-
sign, arts, and multimodal content creation. It is also instrumental in synthesizing training data to
help understand models, leading to the closed loop of multimodal content understanding and gen-
eration. To make use of visual generation, it is critical to produce visual data that is strictly aligned
with human intents. These intentions are fed into the generation model as input conditions, such
as class labels, texts, bounding boxes, layout masks, among others. Given the flexibility offered by
open-ended text descriptions, text conditions (including text-to-image/video/3D) have emerged as a
pivotal theme in conditional visual generation.
In this chapter, we describe how to align with human intents in visual generation, with a focus on
image generation. We start with the overview of the current state of text-to-image (T2I) generation
in Section 3.1, highlighting its limitations concerning alignment with human intents. The core of
this chapter is dedicated to reviewing the literature on four targeted areas that aim at enhancing
alignments in T2I generation, i.e., spatial controllable T2I generation in Section 3.2, text-based
image editing in Section 3.3, better following text prompts in Section 3.4, and concept customization
in T2I generation in Section 3.5. At the end of each subsection, we share our observations on the
current research trends and short-term future research directions. These discussions coalesce in
Section 3.6, where we conclude the chapter by considering future trends. Specifically, we envision
the development of a generalist T2I generation model, which can better follow human intents, to
unify and replace the four separate categories of alignment works.
3.1 Overview
3.1.1 Human Alignments in Visual Generation
AI Alignment research in the context of T2I generation is the field of study dedicated to developing
image generation models that can easily follow human intents to synthesize the desired generated
visual content. Current literature typically focuses on one particular weakness of vanilla T2I models
that prevents them from accurately producing images that align with human intents. This chapter
delves into four commonly studied issues, as summarized in Figure 3.1 (a) and follows.
• Spatial controllable T2I generation. Text serves as a powerful medium for human-computer
interaction, making it a focal point in conditional visual generation. However, text alone falls
short in providing precise spatial references, such as specifying open-ended descriptions for arbi-
trary image regions with precise spatial configurations. Spatial controllable T2I generation (Yang
et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2023n; Zhang and Agrawala, 2023) aims to combine text inputs with other
conditions for better controllability, thereby facilitating users to generate the desired images.
• Text-based image editing. Editing is another important means for acquiring human-intended vi-
sual content. Users might possess near-perfect images, whether generated by a model or naturally
captured by a camera, but these might require specific adjustments to meet their intent. Editing
27