Figure 3.13: The problem setup and result visualization of the visual concept customization task.
Image credit: Ruiz et al. (2023).
3.5 Concept Customization
Though language is an powerful medium to express human intent, it is inefficient in comprehensively
describing all details of a visual concept for reconstruction. For example, it is challenging to use
texts to describe my pet dog or family members with sufficient details, so that they can be generated
in different visual scenes. In such applications, directly extending T2I models to understand visual
concepts via image inputs is a better option.
We examine relevant research on visual concept customization, which offers users the ability to
generate these personalized concepts. (i) Pioneer studies (Gal et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2023; Wei
et al., 2023) start with single-concept customization that involves test-time finetuning to encode
multiple images of the visual concept into a new token embedding, such that the learned embedding
can be used to refer to the concept during T2I generation.(ii) Multi-concept customization (Kumari
et al., 2023; Avrahami et al., 2023a) allows multiple concept tokens to be expanded from the T2I
model’s token vocabulary, enabling multiple concepts to interact with each other and the remaining
visual scene during generation. (iii) Test-time finetuning requires users to tune T2I models for each
new concept to customize. To simplify the usage, studies (Chen et al., 2022f; Shi et al., 2023a;
Chen et al., 2023f; Yang et al., 2023a) explore customization without test-time finetuning and uses
a unified finetuning stage to extend T2I models for accepting image condition inputs. The models
take images of the visual concept as an extra input condition, and generate images with the visual
concept following the text descriptions.
Single-concept customization. The goal of visual concept customization is to enable T2I models
to comprehend additional visual concepts tailored to very specific cases. The problem setup, studied
in Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022), involves translating visual concepts from a handful of images
into unique token embeddings. As illustrated in the left side of Figure 3.13, the T2I model processes
four images of a distinct dog breed, subsequently learning the embedding for a new token, denoted
as [V]. This [V] token can be used as a text token to represent this specific dog. The[V] token can be
seamlessly integrated with other textual descriptions to render the specific dog in various contexts,
such as swimming, in a bucket, and getting a haircut.
Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022) learns the [V] token embedding via prefix tuning, i.e., freezing
all T2I model’s parameters and training the[V] token embedding to generate the input images. Later
studies observe that tuning more model parameters leads to significantly better image generation
quality. However, adjusting only the input image may lead to the risk of overfitting the T2I model
for a particular concept, and losing the capablity to generate diverse images. For instance, the model
might become unable to generate various dog types. To address this, Dreambooth (Ruiz et al.,
2023) proposes the class-specific prior preservation loss. Central to this approach is using the pre-
trained T2I model to produce images of the same class as the targeted customization concept. The
model is then jointly finetuned on both the input image (with the[V] token) and the model-generated
images (without the [V] token). This ensures that the model can differentiate between the unique
“[V] dog” and other general dogs it was initially trained, thus maintaining its overall T2I capability.
Dreambooth then finetunes all T2I model parameters and achieves better image generation quality.
Multi-concept customization. Building on studies that focused on learning a single visual concept
[V], recent research has delved into the possibility of integrating multiple visual concepts into a
single Text-to-Image (T2I) model, represented as [V1], [V2], and so on. Custom Diffusion (Kumari
et al., 2023) employs a selective subset of model weights, specifically the key and value mappings
38