Related topics Instruction text input Content text input Image input
T2I models 
(Sec. 3.1.2; SD)
None Image description None
Region-controlled T2I 
(Sec. 3.2; ReCo)
None Image description + Box 
Tokens
None
T2I with dense 
conditions
(Sec. 3.2; ControlNet)
None Image description Dense conditions
(segmentation, edgemap, 
depth, keypoints, etc.)
Text instruction editing
(Sec. 3.3; InstructPix2Pix)
Editing instruction 
(“change the dog's color 
to blue”)
Contents for editing 
instruction
Image
Concept customization
(Sec. 3.5; SuTI)
Customization 
instruction (“generate a 
dog looks like this one”)
Image description Image
Alignment tuned T2I 
models
(Sec. 3.6)
Arbitrary instruction
(“generate a dog looks 
like the left one but in 
blue”)
Image description + Box 
Tokens (“in <687>, 
<204>, <999>, 
<833>”)
Image or 
dense 
conditions
Figure 3.15: Overview of the unified image and text input interface for human alignments, and its
connection to previous sub-sections.
3.6 Trends: Unified Tuning for Human Alignments
In previous subsections, we presented the literature related to tuning T2I models to more accurately
align with human intent. This includes enhancing spatial controllability, editing existing images for
improved alignment, more effectively following text prompts, and personalizing T2I models for new
visual concepts. A trend observed across these subtopics is the shift towards integrated alignment
solutions that require minimal problem-specific adjustments. Along this direction, we envision a
future T2I model having a unified alignment tuning stage, which transforms a pre-trained T2I model
into one that resonates more intimately with human intent. Such a model would seamlessly process
both text and image inputs, generating the intended visual content without the need for multiple
models tailored to different alignment challenges.
Drawing parallels to the established practice of human-alignment tuning in LLM development, we
anticipate that the techniques reviewed in this section will merge into a holistic second-stage tun-
ing for generative foundation model development. This alignment tuning phase serves two primary
purposes. First, it extends the T2I’s text inputs to incorporate interleaved image-text inputs, as illus-
trated in Figure 3.15. Second, it finetunes the base T2I model, which has been trained using image
generation loss, by the employing data, loss, and rewards that aim to align with human expectations.
Unified image and text inputs. We begin with the discussion on interface unification. Specifically,
we aim to evolve the textual inputs of T2I models into a multimodal interface that seamlessly in-
tegrates both image and text inputs. As shown in Figure 3.15, we consider three types of inputs to
begin with: ”content text input” characterizes the visual scene to be produced; the ”image input” ac-
commodates dense 2D inputs such as images and dense conditions; and the ”instruction text input”
explains how the input content texts and images should be collectively composed as the condition
for generation.
Vanilla T2I models, as shown in the first row of Figure 3.15, take the “content text input” of the
image description and generate the corresponding image. For the spatial controllable generation in
Section 3.2, the extra spatial condition can be specified via text inputs by expanding text words with
extra box tokens, or via image input by feeding the dense spatial conditions as an image input. For
the text-based editing in Section 3.3, we examine the efficacy of text instruction editing, a task that
finetunes the T2I model to comprehend editing instruction texts that manipulate the image input,
altering its pixel values accordingly. For visual concept customization in Section 3.5, the training-
40