free models can now understand customization instructions to extract visual concepts from the image
inputs, and combine the concept with context text inputs for image generation.
Incorporating the three elements of the input interface, the envisioned alignment-tuned T2I model
can handle all previous tasks described in Section 3.2-3.5. Its behavior is steered by specific text
instructions that dictate how the image and text inputs should be jointly processed as the genera-
tion condition. Given the same image input, different text instructions can invoke different tasks:
“generate a cat image with the same layout” for spatial control, “change the dog’s color” for editing,
“generate the same dog sleeping” for concept customization, and the arbitrary mixture of the exist-
ing modes. Achieving such a unified interface in generative foundational models may be possible
through training on a consolidated dataset encompassing data from various tasks, drawing similar-
ities to the success of supervised instruction tuning observed in LLMs. Furthermore, transitioning
from processing a single image-text pair to handling interleaved image-text pairs could enable more
intriguing capabilities like in-context visual demonstrations (Sun et al., 2023b). Another interest-
ing direction is to build a generative model that is capable of generating any combination of output
modalities, such as language, image, video, or audio, from any combination of input modalities, as
demonstrated in Composable Diffusion (CoDi) (Tang et al., 2023b).
Tuning with alignment-focused loss and rewards. In addition to the unified input interface, an-
other noteworthy element deserving consideration is the alignment-focused loss and rewards. As
mentioned in Section 3.4, the image generation loss based on image-text pairs enables models to
produce images that match the target data distribution. Yet, it doesn’t always perfectly align with
human intent. This is reminiscent of the language model loss in LLM training, which necessitates a
separate alignment tuning phase (Ouyang et al., 2022). The recent success in supervised instruction
tuning and reinforcement learning from human feedback methods (Black et al., 2023) on image gen-
eration provides effective tools for similar alignment tuning in generative foundation models. An
intriguing topic left for future exploration is how to balance the different target losses and rewards,
such as jointly optimizing for higher aesthetic scores, better image-text alignment, fewer harmful
contents, stronger instruction adherence, along with many other desired properties.
Closed-loop of multimodal content understanding and generation. As we look ahead, one
promising avenue of research is the closed-loop integration of multimodal content understanding
and generation. Preliminary studies have shown the benefit of using synthesized data to benefit gen-
eration from understanding (Li et al., 2023a; He et al., 2022b), and vice versa. An exciting prospect
would be the development of an image-text-input, image-text-output foundational model for both
understanding and generation tasks. The ideal balance in combining these two dimensions, and the
most efficient approach to achieve it, are left for future explorations.
41