Vocab.: Zebra, Antelope, Giraffe, 
Ostrich, Sky, Water, Grass, Sand
 Query: Owl on the left
 Query: The tangerine on the plate.
 Caption: A river in the 
mountains under blue sky.
Figure 4.13: A generalist model X-Decoder (Zou et al., 2023a) that unifies different vision and
vision-language tasks in a functional manner. It uses a single decoder with the same suite of param-
eters, but different routing mechanisms to tackle different tasks. Image credit: Zou et al. (2023a).
Unified learning
The barrier across tasks is gradually blurred thanks to the use of Transformers (Vaswani et al.,
2017) and the development of open-set models as we discussed earlier. It is now possible to bind
inputs from different modalities to learn a shared semantic space. A number of works (Zhang et al.,
2022b; Zou et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2023g) have recently been proposed to unify vision and vision-
language tasks by using one model for all . After pre-training, the single model can be applied to
tackle all tasks in a zero-shot manner and the performance can be further improved via task-specific
finetuning. Note that unified learning in this context differs from previous works of large-scale pre-
training. Like GPT which serves as a universal language interface after pre-training, a unified vision
model is not only a representation learning engine but also an interface that supports as many tasks
as possible in a zero-shot manner. Below, we review a few representative works.
GLIPv2 (Zhang et al., 2022b) is proposed by extending GLIP (Li et al., 2022f) to support a wide
range of vision and vision-language tasks, including grounded captioning, visual question asnwer-
ing, etc. GLIPv2 seamlessly integrates localization pre-training and Vision-Language Pre-training
(VLP) through three distinct pre-training tasks: (i) phrase grounding, which serves as a vision-
language adaptation of detection tasks; (ii) region-word contrastive learning, introducing a novel
contrastive task at the region-word level; and (iii) masked language modeling. In a zero-shot man-
ner, this pre-trained model can be applied to different tasks and attain plausible performance across
the board. Unlike previous works (e.g., GPV (Gupta et al., 2022b)), it merges the localization mod-
ule and vision-language matching module in a coherent manner, which makes model training from
fused data much more efficient and effective.
X-Decoder (Zou et al., 2023a) follows the generic design of encoder-decoder architecture. Given
an input image, it first uses an image encoder to extract features at multiple scales. Afterward, a
text encoder is used to encode a textual query into a sequence of embeddings. The visual features,
textual queries and the non-semantic or latent queries are fed to a decoder to predict the outputs.
Three critical designs are proposed to empower the generalization ability of X-Decoder to a variety
of vision and vision-language tasks: (i) It defines two types of queries and outputs. Specifically, the
queries for the decoder are categorized into latent queries and text queries, which undertake generic
vision and vision-language tasks, respectively. Likewise, the output is categorized into pixel-level
masks and semantic embeddings; (ii) A single text encoder is exploited to encode the textual corpus
from all tasks. The common text encoder is used to encode referring phrases, text descriptions,
and image captions in the task of referring segmentation, image-text retrieval and image captioning,
respectively; (iii) It fully decouples the image and text encoder, and use all the outputs as queries.
As such, it can learn from both intra-image supervisions and inter-image ones, which is essential
to learn stronger pixel-level representations and support different granularity of tasks. As shown
in Figure 4.13, the pre-trained model can support different tasks by taking different routing while
sharing the same suite of parameters.
55