Uni-Perceiver-v2 (Li et al., 2023g) is another generalist model that unifies vision and vision-
language tasks. Similar to X-Decoder, the model exploits a vision encoder, a text encoder and a
general decoder. Differently, it introduces a region proposal network on top of the vision backbone
to explicitly predict the boxes and masks, which are then encoded as “queries” for the general de-
coder. To jointly train on datasets at different levels, it introduces a unified max-likelihood estimation
strategy for tasks with localization and without localization.
4.4 From Static to Promptable Models
The success of Large Language Models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023b) have shown
the importance of modern AI models in interacting with humans, and have provided a glimpse of
AGI (Bubeck et al., 2023). The ability to interact with humans requires a user-friendly interface that
can take as many types of human inputs as possible and generate responses that humans can easily
understand. In NLP, such a universal interaction interface has emerged and evolved for a while
from early models like GPT (Brown et al., 2020) and T5 (Raffel et al., 2020), to more advanced
techniques like prompting (Shin et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2021; Li and Liang, 2021) and chain-of-
thought (Wei et al., 2022a; Kojima et al., 2022; Schick et al., 2023). However, most vision models
are still static in that they are less flexible than LLMs to various prompts. Most recently, a number
of works have proposed to enhance the static vision models with the capabilities to support: (i)
multi-modal prompting; (ii) in-context prompting.
4.4.1 Multi-modal Prompting
Vision is different from language by nature. To enable a smooth interaction between humans and
AI, a model requires not only language prompts but also other types of prompts to complement
the missing information or resolve the ambiguity in language. Recently, a number of works have
explored how to combine or augment language prompts with other types of prompts, such as spatial
prompts (Kirillov et al., 2023), visual prompts (Zou et al., 2023b) and other modalities (Girdhar
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023f). In the following, we review some representative works.
Spatial prompting. Vision is rooted in the physical world, and as such it is not only semantic
but also spatial by nature. Spatial prompting can be considered as a way to modulate the vision
models through the inputs of location information, which could be a point, a box, or an arbitrary
stroke, etc. Such clues have been heavily used in UI designs of computers (e.g., mouse) and mobile
devices (e.g., touch screen). In computer vision, interactive segmentation (Mortensen and Barrett,
1998; McGuinness and O’connor, 2010; Chen et al., 2021c, 2022i) naturally requires such capability
so that the model can take multiple clicks from users and gradually refine the segmentation mask.
However, most of these works are still designed task-specifically and lack enough flexibility to
support different types of spatial prompts.
SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) is one of the pioneering works that propose a convenient spatial prompt-
ing interface and learn a foundation model for image segmentation. As shown in Figure 4.14, the
model can take points or boxes as the prompts, and segment images in arbitrary granularity. The
ability to segment images following the user instructions from humans makes it readily a foundation
to build many more models and applications (Zhang et al., 2023c). To name a few, a number of
works (Ma and Wang, 2023; Roy et al., 2023) start with SAM and train a promptable segmentation
model for the medical domain. Spatial prompting is particularly beneficial in that the textual anno-
tations for medical images are usually limited and hard to interpret. Similar cases also happen in
other industry domains (Tang et al., 2023a). To further improve point prompting, SAMAug (Dai
et al., 2023a) proposes to refine the points using the max entropy criterion and saliency map, which
can help to determine the most informative locations the model should look at.
Visual prompting. In many cases, textual descriptions of objects are not necessarily clear to con-
vey the information. For example, given an unrecognizable or indescribable object, people may fail
to express themselves clearly about the object. In this case, showing one or a few examples would
be more informative and straightforward. With this idea, a lineup of works have studied exemplar-
based visual modeling, such as image-to-image retrieval (Yoon et al., 2021; Datta et al., 2008; Zhang
et al., 2018), image co-segmentation (Joulin et al., 2010; Jerripothula et al., 2016) and visual object
tracking (Yilmaz et al., 2006; Luo et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2013). Most recently, this strategy has
56