Chapter 5
Large Multimodal Models:
Training with LLM
In this chapter, we comprehensively explore large multimodal models (Alayrac et al., 2022; Ope-
nAI, 2023a). We begin with Section 5.1 to delve into the background of such models, with the focus
on the basics of image-to-text generative models and their representative model instances in vari-
ous case studies. We also discuss the state-of-the-art OpenAI Multimodal GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023a)
and identify the existing research gaps in the field. To better understand the process of instruction
tuning in large language models, Section 5.2 examines its importance and its role in self-instruct
and open-source LLMs. Moving forward, we explore instruction-tuned large multimodal models in
Section 5.3, shedding light on their basics, significance and applications. Additionally, Section 5.4
touches upon advanced topics in the realm of multimodal models to provide a deeper understanding
of the subject. Finally, we assess the current progress in the field by evaluating how close we are to
achieving the OpenAI Multimodal GPT-4 in Section 5.5, a major milestone in AI research.
5.1 Background
5.1.1 Image-to-Text Generative Models
LMMs in their current form is primarily an image-to-text generative model, which takes images as
input, and outputs a text sequence. One example is illustrated in Figure 5.1 (a) Left. All of the model
variants share a very similar model architecture and training objective.
• Model Architecture. As illustrated in Figure 5.1 (a) Right, the model typically consists of an
image encoder to extract visual features, and a language model to decode the text sequence.
The vision and language modalities can be optionally connected by trainable connection mod-
ule. The image encoder and language model can be either trained from scratch or initialized
from pre-trained models.
• Training Objective. As illustrated in Figure 5.1 (b), it typically employs an auto-regressive loss
on the output text tokens. For the attention map in the Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017),
image tokens can attend to each other, and the current text token attends to all image tokens
and the previous text tokens.
5.1.2 Case Studies
We use some prominent LMMs as examples to illustrate how the aforementioned network archi-
tecture can be instantiated in different models, while maintaining the same auto-regressive training
objective.
Case study I: LMM trained with image-text pairwise instances. Most LMMs are trained on a
large number of image-text pairs, where each training sample is a pair. GIT (Wang et al., 2022a) and
61