MultiModalGPT-4
10
GPT-4 Technical Report, OpenAI
•Model Details: Unknown•Capability: Strong zero-shot visual understanding & reasoning on many user-oriented tasks in the wild
How can we build Multimodal GPT-4 like models?
Figure 5.4: OpenAI Multimodal GPT-4. Visual examples are from OpenAI (2023a).
no clue how this new ability is achieved (probably because they are not tightened to any established
academic tasks/datasets), but all are determined that these are exciting results. It naturally raises a
question: how can we build Multimodal GPT-4 like models?
To answer it, we start to review the big models from OpenAI, by highlighting the most appealing
properties for each model in Figure 5.5. There are several key observations: (i) GPT-2 (Radford
et al., 2019) is the auto-regressive counterpart in the BERT era (Devlin et al., 2019) for the pre-
train-then-finetune paradigm. Compared with GPT-2, GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) is a 175B model
trained on web-scale text corpus, which exhibits two emerging properties with a frozen model:
in-context-learning (Brown et al., 2020) and chain-of-thoughts (CoT) reasoning (Wei et al., 2022a).
This means, without any additional training, the model can tackle a wide range of new problems with
just a few task-specific examples and by properly prompting it step-by-step, respectively. It further
leads to the modeling paradigm from task-specific finetuning to prompting frozen models, where
the latter shows higher generalizability and lower adaptation cost in task transfer.(ii) ChatGPT and
InstructGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022) show the importance of instruction-following and alignment with
human intents for LLMs, by finetuning the base language model GPT-3/GPT-3.5 on high quality
instruction-following data, and improving them with a reward model via reinforcement learning
with human feedback. (iii) GPT-4 not only improves the language ability of previous models, but
also allows visual signals as additional input for visual understanding and reasoning. We see that the
newer generation model maintains/improves the existing properties of the previous ones, and enable
new properties.
In other words, from GPT-3 to GPT-4, we see two new properties: instruction-following and multi-
modal input. This reveals the gap between existing LMMs (e.g., Flamingo) and multimodal GPT-4:
how to perform instruction-following and alignment research in the multimodal space, which is the
focus of this chapter.
5.2 Pre-requisite: Instruction Tuning in Large Language Models
Note that instruction-following is a notion originated in NLP. To study the intuition behind it and
have a full picture of its history, we first revisit instruction tuning with LLMs.
Traditional language data. As a typical data instance in NLP, sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq)
representation is widely adopted for many language tasks: each data instance consists of two parts:
one sequence as the input and another sequence as the output. We provide two examples in Fig-
64