Recap on Language Modeling: Large Language Models (LLM)
GPT-3ChatGPTInstructGPTGPT-4
FlamingoBLIP2GIT…
MultimodalSpace
11
GPT-2In-context-learningChain-of-thoughts (CoT)What’s new?
Instruction
-
Following
Multimodal Input with image
In-context-learningChain-of-thoughts (CoT)
Instruction
-
FollowingIn-context-learningChain-of-thoughts (CoT)
Multimodal GPT-4Gap?
Instruction
-
Following
à
Alignment Research
Figure 5.5: Recap on Language Modeling: OpenAI LLM development history. The unique proper-
ties for each generation model are highlighted, from which the research gap is revealed for LMM.
ure 5.6 (a). Without any task instruction specified, we know they are translation and summarization
tasks, respectively.
This seq2seq representation is also the conventional data format in NLP research, where task in-
structions are implicit. Based on each data domain, individual models are trained. Or sometimes
one model is trained with multi-task objectives over multiple data domain without specifying the
task instructions. For both cases, the models are hard to generalize to new tasks in a zero-shot fash-
ion, as they are not trained to understand task instructions, thus cannot distinguish and generalize
what task to perform during testing time.
Instructional language data. Recently, researchers have started to explicitly add task instructions
into the model training, as shown in Figure 5.6 (b). Interestingly, the task instruction of most NLP
tasks can be expressed in natural language as well. It leads a new data format: instruction-input-
output triplets. Based on the new format, one single model can be trained to perform multiple tasks,
each with its specific instructions. Since models have observed many task instructions and many
instances for each task during training, it is more natural and easier for them to generalize to new
tasks by task composition in the inference stage.
For example, in the evaluation stage, a new task that requires both summarization and translation
is provided in Figure 5.6 (c). Though the model has never seen this new task during training, it
observes individual task basis, and learns to perform on new tasks. Note that we humans are always
creating new tasks in our daily life, and presumably these new tasks would never been observed by
models. It is thus appealing if a model is able to solve thousands of new tasks in the wild without
training. This is partially why ChatGPT is becoming popular and prevalent so quickly.
5.2.1 Instruction Tuning
How can we collect a diverse set of high-quality instruction-following data? There are two gen-
eral schemes. One is through human-human interaction, where humans (task providers) provide
the annotation statement and requirements, based on which another group of humans complete the
annotation tasks. Such a scheme is typically costly and time consuming. The other scheme is via
human-machine interaction, where similarly humans provide the annotation statement and require-
ments, but it is now the machines/models that complete the annotation tasks.
To enable LLMs to follow natural language instructions and complete real-world tasks, researchers
have been exploring methods to instruction-tune LLMs. This is implemented by either finetuning
the model on a wide range of tasks using human-annotated prompts and feedback (Ouyang et al.,
2022), or supervised finetuning using public benchmarks and datasets augmented with manually
or automatically generated instructions (Wang et al., 2022f). Among these methods, Self-instruct
tuning (Wang et al., 2022e) is a simple and effective method of aligning LLMs to human intent,
by learning from instruction-following data generated by SoTA LLMs. It turns out that the line of
instruction-tuning research has produced effective means to improve zero-shot and few-shot gen-
eralization abilities of LLMs. Self-instruct leverages the in-context-learning ability of LLM. The
pipeline is illustrated in Figure 5.7. Humans create a few examples ( i.e. seed examples) as the con-
65