OpenFlamingo (Awadalla et al., 2023) is an open source version of DeepMind’s Flamingo model,
trained on Multimodal C4 dataset (Zhu et al., 2023b), which is a billions-scale corpus of inter-
leaved image-text data. To explicitly enhance the multimodal in-context-learning ability of LMMs,
MIMIC-IT (Li et al., 2023c) dataset is constructed, which is 2.4M multimodal instruction instances
with in-context examples. By tuning OpenFlamingo on MIMIC-IT, a new model Otter is obtained
with a stronger instruction-following ability. Using two image-text pairs as the context, Otter learns
the concise answer style demonstrated by the examples, otherwise a tedious response is generated.
Parameter-Efficient Training
While finetuning very large models often leads to high performance, it is prohibitively expensive;
For example, regular 16-bit finetuning of a LLaMA-65B model (Touvron et al., 2023) requires more
than 780 GB of GPU memory (Dettmers et al., 2023). Therefore, it is critical to reduce the memory
footprint of LLMs/LMMs, especially when it comes to improve the accessibility of large models to
a wider community.
Parameter-efficient training is an effective approach for LMM adaptation. It freezes most of the
model parameters, and only allows a fraction of trainable parameters to update with domain-specific
data. For example, LLaMA Adapter v2 (Gao et al., 2023b) and LA VIN (Luo et al., 2023a) only have
14M and 3.8M trainable parameters, compared with 7B/13B LLM parameters, respectively. Another
efficient training method is quantization. The recent QLoRA (Dettmers et al., 2023) finetunes 65B
LLaMA for 24 hours on a single GPU, achieving 99.3% of the performance level of ChatGPT. Since
instruction tuning typically involves a small amount of data, it makes parameter-efficient training
or model quantization the practical approach, especially when with limited GPU resources. Both
LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) and QLoRA are supported in LLaV A codebase to allow LMM training with
less GPUs. It is empirically shown in Lu et al. (2023d) that LoRA/QLoRA can achieve similar per-
formance with full-modal tuning when scaling LLaV A to 33B and 65B, when training with around
150K instruct data and evaluating with LLaV A-Bench.
Benchmarks
While LMMs have shown excellent visual recognition and reasoning in an open-set manner with
free-form text across many scenarios, the evaluation of LMMs is becoming an urgent and challeng-
ing problem. Several related benchmarks have been developed to evaluate various aspects of LMMs,
ranging from their specific abilities including OCR (Liu et al., 2023k), hallucination (POPE (Li
et al., 2023l) and HaELM (Wang et al., 2023d)) and adversarial robustness (Zhao et al., 2023d), to
comprehensive evaluation such as LAMM (Yin et al., 2023), LVLM-eHub (Xu et al., 2023b). We
summarize the LMM evaluation benchmarks in Table 5.2. Among them, LLaV A-Bench is the first
attempt to designed open-world visual chat benchmark specifically for LMM. Recently, early multi-
modal experiments have been conducted to compare open-source LMM with commercial ones such
as BingChat and Bard and LLaV A-Bench (Liu et al., 2023c) and LVLM-eHub (Shao et al., 2023).
It is surprising that LMMs shows strong zero-shot OCR performance in the wild, without explicitly
training on text recognition data. To shed light on the hidden mystery of OCR in LMMs, a com-
prehensive empirical study is conducted in Liu et al. (2023k) to compare open-source LMMs on
24 academic text recognition datasets, shown in Figure 5.13. Three observations are highlighted:
(i) LLaV A consistently outperforms MiniGPT-4 on 21 out of 24 datasets, despite that the training
data in LLaV A is an order of magnitude smaller.(ii) Training with significantly more training data
leads to higher OCR performance, as demonstrated by BLIP2 (Li et al., 2023h) and mPLUG-Owl.
(iii) In most cases, supervised SoTA results significantly outperform zero-shot LMM. However, it
is worth noting that in the WordArt dataset (Xie et al., 2022a), which primarily features challenging
artistic text, BLIP2 surpasses supervised SoTA. This reveals the potential of LMM in recognizing
more complex text types.
Applications
The success of ChatGPT/GPT-4 in the general domain has inspired the interests in building assistants
in the vertical domains such as medicine, gaming and education. Such domain-specific assistants
can have the several advantages over the general domain counterpart: (i) training with high-quality
domain-speicifc data makes the assistants more helpful; (ii) the model size can be smaller, with
74