Chapter 6
Multimodal Agents:
Chaining Tools with LLM
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Chowdhery et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023a) have shown intriguing
properties generalizing to user prompts in various domains, and rapidly adapting to new scenarios,
using in-context learning with a few examples. Inspired by such strong capabilities, researchers
are now exploring a new modeling paradigm that shifts from standalone models for solving finite,
pre-defined problems, into synergistically chaining multiple tools or experts with LLMs to solve
complicated, open problems. Unlike what has been introduced in Chapter 5, such a system can be
built without any training involved, just by using a few demonstration examples to teach the LLM
to generate proper calling to existing tools.
In this chapter, we review the fast-evolving literature on chaining different multimodal experts with
LLMs to solve complicated multimodal understanding problems, referred to as multimodal agents.
We start with an overview on the evolution of this modeling paradigm in Section 6.1, highlighting
the differences between traditional approaches and the new modeling paradigm of chaining tools
with LLM. Section 6.2 gives a general overview of multimodal agents. Pivoting on an exemplary
multimodal agent MM-R EACT (Yang* et al., 2023), Section 6.3 comprehensively reviews how to
build a multimodal agent, its emerging capabilities in multimodal understanding, and how it can
be easily extended to incorporate the latest and strongest LLM and potentially millions of tools.
Finally, in Section 6.4, we end the chapter with discussions on advanced topics, such as how to
improve/evaluate multimodal agents, the diverse applications powered by multimodal agents.
6.1 Overview
We first revisit the evolution of modeling paradigms, from task-specific models to the most recent
large multimodal models, which all require data curation and model training. We then introduce
the new modeling paradigm of chaining tools with LLM, which may not require any training, but
instead directly takes advantage of a pre-trained LLM and existing tools that are widely available
through open-source platforms or APIs.
Figure 6.1: Evolution of modeling paradigm.
77