Visual Math and Text Reasoning
Multi-Image Reasoning
Open-World Concept Understanding Video Summarization/Event Localization
Multi-Hop Document Understanding
Visual-Conditioned Joke/Meme Spatial/Coordinate Understanding
Visual Planning and Prediction
What is “a” in the ﬁrst equation?
What is y in the last equation?
The value of “a” in the ﬁrst equation 
“5 + a = 7” is 2.
The value of “y” in the last equation 
“34 + y = 39” is 5.
How much in total did I spend on travel?
How much in total did I pay for taxes?
You spent $1299.90 on airfare and 
$43.83 on an Uber ride for a total of 
$1343.73 on travel. 
You paid $323.23 in total for taxes. 
This includes $321.90 for taxes and 
fees for the ﬂight purchase and $1.33 
for sales tax for the Windmill Family 
Restaurant.
Excluding the regular cab, what is the average total 
fueling cost?
The average total fueling cost 
excluding the Ford F150 (Regular Cab) 
is $76.55. This is calculated by taking 
the sum of the total fueling cost of 
Toyota RAV4 and Honda Civic and 
dividing it by 2. ($82.56 + $70.55) / 2 
= $76.55.
Where is the frisbee?
What is the relative position of the frisbee and the man?
 The frisbee is located at coordinates 
(63,119,133,177).
The frisbee is located above the man 
in the image. The man is falling on the 
ground while the frisbee is in the air. 
The frisbee is also closer to the top of 
the image than the man.
What is funny about it?
The humor in the comic may come 
from the situation, the characters, or 
the dialogue. The person is feeling 
unwell and is asked if they are 
pregnant or have the coronavirus, 
which is a current and relevant topic. 
The humor may come from the 
absurdity of the situation or the 
unexpectedness of the question. 
What should I do after kneading the dough, before 
dividing it into pieces? For how long?
After kneading the dough, you 
should put it in a warm place before 
dividing it into pieces, according to 
the recipe in the image.
You should put the dough in a 
warm place for 1 hour.
Can you breakdown this video tutorial to step-by-step 
instructions, with start and end time?
Here's a step-by-step breakdown of 
the tutorial with start and end time.
What is the brand of these drink? 
Which one is unsweetened?
The brand of these 
drinks is “BETTER 
THAN MILK”. The 
unsweetened one is 
“BETTER THAN MILK 
organic OAT DRINK”.
Who are the celebrities in this 
image?
Keira Knightley and 
Natalie Portman are 
the celebrities in this 
image.
Is it safe to eat this mushroom?
Morel mushrooms are 
generally considered 
safe to eat when 
properly cooked. 
Add Lettuce Add Tomato Add Bacon
… …
Figure 6.6: Emerging capabilities of MM-R EACT for multimodal reasoning and action. Image
credit: Yang* et al. (2023).
MM-ReAct encourages ChatGPT to show thethought (reasoning) process to highlight why an exter-
nal tool is needed, which has been proven beneficial in NLP studies (Yao et al., 2022c). In addition,
for generating proper calling to each tool, both instructions and in-context examples are added as the
prefix when prompting ChatGPT. Each tool is described with the model name, a general description
of its capability, the input data format, and the output information. After describing each tool, a few
in-context dialogue examples are also included for enhanced performance.
Execution. Given the action request from ChatGPT, the tool name and the file path can be parsed
via regular expression matching, which are used to invoke the tool (action execution).
Take the example shown in Figure 6.5, upon receiving the input image, ChatGPT first invokes a se-
ries of tools for a general understanding about the image. The invoked tools include image caption-
ing for an overall description of the image; dense captioning to get the region-level, more detailed
description about the objects in the image; object tagging to get the tags of the objects in the image;
face detection to get the box coordinates of the two faces mentioned in the object tags. The outputs
from the tools (i.e. observations) are serialized as text, and fed back to ChatGPT.
Combining observations with the chat history, ChatGPT can further invoke additional experts or
return the final answer to the user. In this specific example, ChatGPT invokes a second round of
thought-action-observation over the two faces detected in the image and calls celebrity recognition
to get the names of these two persons.
Response generation. When ChatGPT decides no external tools are needed, it takes consideration
of all observations gathered and summarize them as the response to the user, which is “This image
contains two celebrities, Kobe Bryant and Paul Pierce. They are both basketball players.” for the
example shown in Figure 6.5.
If the user continues to interact with MM-R EACT, it repeats the process described above, but with
all observations and chat history available when planning for the tools needed. For instance, if the
user then asks “how many championship rings did the player on the left win in his career”, it is
not available in the existing observations nor chat history, but ChatGPT has the bounding boxes to
decide who is on the left, and also the names of the players. It plans to invoke Bing Search to find
the right answer, which should be 5.
82