6.4.5 Tool Creation
Imagine if we have a completely new scenario without a robust tool to use. Can we create a tool
based on the user need on-the-fly? In NLP, CREATOR (Qian et al., 2023) proposes to create tools
by writing python code for math reasoning, as opposed to calling math solver API such as Wolfram
Alpha. Cai et al. (2023) further explores the capabilities of LLMs to make tools, and experiment
with two LLMs, one as the tool maker and the other as the tool user to collaboratively solve com-
plicated tasks, such as scheduling a meeting. In terms of multimodal agents, the challenge is how to
create a tool that can process multimodal inputs. One may follow ViperGPT (Sur ´ıs et al., 2023) to
instruct LLMs to generate python programs leveraging pre-existent python packages such as Open-
CV . AutoML GPT (Zhang et al., 2023j) envisions that one can utilize LLMs to automate the model
training pipeline. There may be potential to develop novel multimodal deep learning tools tailored
to more effectively address the requirements of users.
6.4.6 Retrieval-Augmented Multimodal Agents
In real-life applications, a substantial portion of information resides within databases, and user needs
may require accurate retrieval of such information. Meanwhile, it is infeasible to encode all the
world knowledge into the weights of pre-trained models, particularly when it comes to the long-tail
concepts and fast-evolving data.
In NLP, several works augment LLMs with external data encoded with structured language and
relation representations (Peters et al., 2019; Guu et al., 2020; Lewis et al., 2020). Given input
texts, such retrieved-augmented models utilize a retriever that retrieves relevant documents from an
external memory, and uses a generator to generate predictions given the retrieved documents.
Motivated by retrieval-augmented models in NLP, several recent works leverage visual and / or
textual knowledge to improve vision tasks, such as image classification (Long et al., 2022), cap-
tioning (Yang et al., 2023a), question answering (Wu et al., 2021; Marino et al., 2021; Yang et al.,
2022d; Chen et al., 2022e), image generation (Blattmann et al., 2022; Sheynin et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2022f; Zhou et al., 2022c), and multi-modal tasks simultaneously (Yasunaga et al., 2022).
RAC (Long et al., 2022) improves long-tail classification by retrieving from a non-parametric mem-
ory consisting of pre-encoded images and text. K-LITE (Shen et al., 2022a) enhances the text
prompts with the retrieved external knowledge that is encoded in natural language. REACT (Liu
et al., 2023d) retrieve from billions of the paired knowledge of image-text and aims to improve
task transfer performance for core vision problems. Among them, RA-CM3 (Yasunaga et al., 2022)
builds the first retrieval-augmented LMM with a multimodal retriever to retrieve multimodal docu-
ments, and a retrieval-augmented generator that can generate both text and image. Chaining tools
with LLM shares a strong connection with the retrieval-augmented methods in that both leverage ex-
ternal knowledge to provide additional information for the core model to utilize. In the multimodal
regime, the image itself can be used as the query to gain external knowledge, either retrieved from a
knowledge base, or extracted from another pre-trained vision expert models.
88