Chapter 7
Conclusions and Research Trends
Multimodal foundation models have garnered significant interest among scholars in the fields of
computer vision and multimodal vision-language research. Although prevailing research topics,
approaches and methodologies have been evolving – encompassing image self-supervised learning,
language-image contrastive learning, text-to-image generation, unified vision modeling, and large
language-and-vision assistants – they converge on a common overarching objective: the creation of
general-purpose models and systems capable of following human intents and effortlessly executing
a diverse array of vision and vision-language tasks in the wild. In this chapter, we provide a concise
summary of what has been reviewed, and delve into the prevailing research tendencies in the field.
7.1 Summary and Conclusions
This paper surveys the most recent advances at the frontier of multimodal foundation model research,
categorized into two classes discussed below.
• Specific-purpose multimodal foundation models. There is a diverse set of problems to tackle
in the computer vision community. To lay a comprehensive foundation for the introduction of
general-purpose visual assistants, we have discussed many seminar papers in the era of pre-
training. The major paradigm during this period is pre-training on a large amount of problem-
related data, and then transferring to a number of real-world scenarios of the same problem type
in a zero- or few-shot fashion. More specifically, we have presented two general topics: ( i) Vi-
sual Understanding in Chapter 2: individual multimodal foundation models have developed to
analyze the content of visual data in the image, region, pixel levels, prospectively. The language-
augmented vision models are a popular family, contributing to the recent success of visual under-
standing tasks in the wild. ( ii) Visual Generation in Chapter 3: text-to-image generation models
have served the foundation for image synthesis, which has been successfully extended to allow
user controllability and customization at more fine-grained manners. The availability and cre-
ation of large amount of problem-related data has played a key role in making these multimodal
foundation models possible.
• General-purpose assistants. We have reviewed recently emerged literature on building general-
purpose assistants, which often possess an unified network architecture, an unified input-output
data format, and a general interface that facilitates easy interaction with humans. Inspired by the
success in NLP that LLM such as ChatGPT/GPT-4 is a general assistant for a wide range of lan-
guage tasks, researchers in computer vision have explored various solutions to their counterpart
for vision tasks. Based on how LLM is leveraged in the methodology, existing works can be cate-
gorized into three topics: (i) Unified Vision Models in Chapter 4: The spirit of unifying modeling
in LLM is borrowed to build unified vision models at different levels and across different tasks.
(ii) Training with LLM in Chapter 5: Starting with a pre-trained LLM, visual data is connected to
LLM for end-to-end training. ( iii) Chaining with LLM in Chapter 6: By freezing LLM, existing
vision experts can be triggered by prompt engineering LLM to complete specific vision tasks.
The comparisons among these models are summarized in Table 7.1.
89