Fig. 37: An example of synthesizing RAG with LLMs for question answering application [166].
Fig. 38: This is one example of synthesizing the KG as a
retriever with LLMs [167].
a) RAG-aware prompting techniques: Because of the
importance of RAG to build advanced LLM systems, several
RAG-aware prompting techniques have been developed re-
cently. One such technique is Forward-looking Active Retrieval
Augmented Generation (FLARE)
Forward-looking Active Retrieval Augmented Generation
(FLARE) [168] enhances the capabilities of Large Language
Models (LLMs) by iteratively combining prediction and in-
formation retrieval. FLARE represents an evolution in the
use of retrieval-augmented generation, aimed at improving the
accuracy and relevance of LLM responses.
FLARE involves an iterative process where the LLM
actively predicts upcoming content and uses these predictions
as queries to retrieve relevant information. This method con-
trasts with traditional retrieval-augmented models that typically
retrieve information once and then proceed with generation. In
FLARE, this process is dynamic and ongoing throughout the
generation phase. In FLARE, each sentence or segment gener-
ated by the LLM is evaluated for confidence. If the confidence
level is below a certain threshold, the model uses the generated
content as a query to retrieve relevant information, which is
then used to regenerate or refine the sentence. This iterative
process ensures that each part of the response is informed by
the most relevant and current information available.
For more details on RAG framework and its relevant works,
we refer the readers to this survey of retrieval augmented
generations [165].
D. Using External T ools
Retrieving information from an external knowledge source
as described above is only one of the potential ways to augment
an LLM. More generally, an LLM can access any number
of external tools (e.g. an API to a service) to augment its
functionality. In that regards, RAG can be seen as a specific
instance of the broader category of the so called ”tools”.
Tools in this context are external functions or services that
LLMs can utilize. These tools extend the range of tasks an
LLM can perform, from basic information retrieval to complex
interactions with external databases or APIs.
In the paper ”Toolformer: Language Models Can Teach
Themselves to Use Tools” [169], the authors go beyond simple
tool usage by training an LLM to decide what tool to use
when, and even what parameters the API needs. Tools include
two different search engines, or a calculator. In the following
examples, the LLM decides to call an external Q&A tool,
a calculator, and a Wikipedia Search Engine More recently,
researchers at Berkeley have trained a new LLM called Gorilla
[67] that beats GPT-4 at the use of APIs, a specific but quite
general tool.
a) Tool-aware prompting techniques: Similarly to what
was described with RAG, several tool-aware prompting ap-
proaches have been developed to make usage of tools more
scalable. A popular technique is the so called Automatic Multi-
step Reasoning and Tool-use (ART).
Automatic Multi-step Reasoning and Tool-use (ART) [170]
is a prompt engineering technique that combines automated
chain of thought prompting with the use of external tools.
ART represents a convergence of multiple prompt engineering
strategies, enhancing the ability of Large Language Models