7
Fig. 4. RAG compared with other model optimization methods in the aspects of “External Knowledge Required” and “Model Adaption Required”. Prompt
Engineering requires low modifications to the model and external knowledge, focusing on harnessing the capabilities of LLMs themselves. Fine-tuning, on
the other hand, involves further training the model. In the early stages of RAG (Naive RAG), there is a low demand for model modifications. As research
progresses, Modular RAG has become more integrated with fine-tuning techniques.
Unstructured Data , such as text, is the most widely used
retrieval source, which are mainly gathered from corpus. For
open-domain question-answering (ODQA) tasks, the primary
retrieval sources are Wikipedia Dump with the current major
versions including HotpotQA 4 (1st October , 2017), DPR5 (20
December, 2018). In addition to encyclopedic data, common
unstructured data includes cross-lingual text [19] and domain-
specific data (such as medical [67]and legal domains [29]).
Semi-structured data. typically refers to data that contains a
combination of text and table information, such as PDF. Han-
dling semi-structured data poses challenges for conventional
RAG systems due to two main reasons. Firstly, text splitting
processes may inadvertently separate tables, leading to data
corruption during retrieval. Secondly, incorporating tables into
the data can complicate semantic similarity searches. When
dealing with semi-structured data, one approach involves lever-
aging the code capabilities of LLMs to execute Text-2-SQL
queries on tables within databases, such as TableGPT [85].
Alternatively, tables can be transformed into text format for
further analysis using text-based methods [75]. However, both
of these methods are not optimal solutions, indicating substan-
tial research opportunities in this area.
Structured data , such as knowledge graphs (KGs) [86] ,
which are typically verified and can provide more precise in-
formation. KnowledGPT [15] generates KB search queries and
stores knowledge in a personalized base, enhancing the RAG
model’s knowledge richness. In response to the limitations of
LLMs in understanding and answering questions about textual
graphs, G-Retriever [84] integrates Graph Neural Networks
4https://hotpotqa.github.io/wiki-readme.html
5https://github.com/facebookresearch/DPR
(GNNs), LLMs and RAG, enhancing graph comprehension
and question-answering capabilities through soft prompting
of the LLM, and employs the Prize-Collecting Steiner Tree
(PCST) optimization problem for targeted graph retrieval. On
the contrary, it requires additional effort to build, validate,
and maintain structured databases. On the contrary, it requires
additional effort to build, validate, and maintain structured
databases.
LLMs-Generated Content. Addressing the limitations of
external auxiliary information in RAG, some research has
focused on exploiting LLMs’ internal knowledge. SKR [58]
classifies questions as known or unknown, applying retrieval
enhancement selectively. GenRead [13] replaces the retriever
with an LLM generator, finding that LLM-generated contexts
often contain more accurate answers due to better alignment
with the pre-training objectives of causal language modeling.
Selfmem [17] iteratively creates an unbounded memory pool
with a retrieval-enhanced generator, using a memory selec-
tor to choose outputs that serve as dual problems to the
original question, thus self-enhancing the generative model.
These methodologies underscore the breadth of innovative
data source utilization in RAG, striving to improve model
performance and task effectiveness.
2) Retrieval Granularity: Another important factor besides
the data format of the retrieval source is the granularity of
the retrieved data. Coarse-grained retrieval units theoretically
can provide more relevant information for the problem, but
they may also contain redundant content, which could distract
the retriever and language models in downstream tasks [50],
[87]. On the other hand, fine-grained retrieval unit granularity
increases the burden of retrieval and does not guarantee seman-
tic integrity and meeting the required knowledge. Choosing