14
TABLE III
SUMMARY OF METRICS APPLICABLE FOR EVALUATION ASPECTS OF RAG
Context
Relevance Faithfulness Answer
Relevance
Noise
Robustness
Negative
Rejection
Information
Integration
Counterfactual
Robustness
Accuracy ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
EM ✓
Recall ✓
Precision ✓ ✓
R-Rate ✓
Cosine Similarity ✓
Hit Rate ✓
MRR ✓
NDCG ✓
BLEU ✓ ✓ ✓
ROUGE/ROUGE-L ✓ ✓ ✓
The specific metrics for each evaluation aspect are sum-
marized in Table III. It is essential to recognize that these
metrics, derived from related work, are traditional measures
and do not yet represent a mature or standardized approach for
quantifying RAG evaluation aspects. Custom metrics tailored
to the nuances of RAG models, though not included here, have
also been developed in some evaluation studies.
D. Evaluation Benchmarks and Tools
A series of benchmark tests and tools have been proposed
to facilitate the evaluation of RAG.These instruments furnish
quantitative metrics that not only gauge RAG model perfor-
mance but also enhance comprehension of the model’s capabil-
ities across various evaluation aspects. Prominent benchmarks
such as RGB, RECALL and CRUD [167]–[169] focus on
appraising the essential abilities of RAG models. Concur-
rently, state-of-the-art automated tools like RAGAS [164],
ARES [165], and TruLens 8 employ LLMs to adjudicate the
quality scores. These tools and benchmarks collectively form
a robust framework for the systematic evaluation of RAG
models, as summarized in Table IV.
VII. D ISCUSSION AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
Despite the considerable progress in RAG technology, sev-
eral challenges persist that warrant in-depth research.This
chapter will mainly introduce the current challenges and future
research directions faced by RAG.
A. RAG vs Long Context
With the deepening of related research, the context of LLMs
is continuously expanding [170]–[172]. Presently, LLMs can
effortlessly manage contexts exceeding 200,000 tokens 9. This
capability signifies that long-document question answering,
previously reliant on RAG, can now incorporate the entire
document directly into the prompt. This has also sparked
discussions on whether RAG is still necessary when LLMs
8https://www.trulens.org/trulens eval/core concepts rag triad/
9https://kimi.moonshot.cn
are not constrained by context. In fact, RAG still plays an
irreplaceable role. On one hand, providing LLMs with a
large amount of context at once will significantly impact its
inference speed, while chunked retrieval and on-demand input
can significantly improve operational efficiency. On the other
hand, RAG-based generation can quickly locate the original
references for LLMs to help users verify the generated an-
swers. The entire retrieval and reasoning process is observable,
while generation solely relying on long context remains a
black box. Conversely, the expansion of context provides new
opportunities for the development of RAG, enabling it to
address more complex problems and integrative or summary
questions that require reading a large amount of material to
answer [49]. Developing new RAG methods in the context of
super-long contexts is one of the future research trends.
B. RAG Robustness
The presence of noise or contradictory information during
retrieval can detrimentally affect RAG’s output quality. This
situation is figuratively referred to as “Misinformation can
be worse than no information at all”. Improving RAG’s
resistance to such adversarial or counterfactual inputs is gain-
ing research momentum and has become a key performance
metric [48], [50], [82]. Cuconasu et al. [54] analyze which
type of documents should be retrieved, evaluate the relevance
of the documents to the prompt, their position, and the
number included in the context. The research findings reveal
that including irrelevant documents can unexpectedly increase
accuracy by over 30%, contradicting the initial assumption
of reduced quality. These results underscore the importance
of developing specialized strategies to integrate retrieval with
language generation models, highlighting the need for further
research and exploration into the robustness of RAG.
C. Hybrid Approaches
Combining RAG with fine-tuning is emerging as a leading
strategy. Determining the optimal integration of RAG and
fine-tuning whether sequential, alternating, or through end-to-
end joint training—and how to harness both parameterized