Fig. 12: Training of LLaMA-2 Chat. Courtesy of [61].
Fig. 13: Relative Response Quality of Vicuna and a few other
well-known models by GPT-4. Courtesy of Vicuna Team.
U-PaLM is later instruction-finetuned as Flan-PaLM [74].
Compared to other instruction finetuning work mentioned
above, Flan-PaLM’s finetuning is performed using a much
larger number of tasks, larger model sizes, and chain-of-
thought data. As a result, Flan-PaLM substantially outperforms
previous instruction-following models. For instance, Flan-
PaLM-540B, which is instruction-finetuned on 1.8K tasks,
outperforms PaLM-540B by a large margin (+9.4% on av-
erage). The finetuning data comprises 473 datasets, 146 task
categories, and 1,836 total tasks, as illustrated in Fig 14.
Fig. 14: Flan-PaLM finetuning consist of 473 datasets in above
task categories. Courtesy of [74].
PaLM-2 [75] is a more compute-efficient LLM with bet-
ter multilingual and reasoning capabilities, compared to its
predecessor PaLM. PaLM-2 is trained using a mixture of
objectives. Through extensive evaluations on English, multi-
lingual, and reasoning tasks, PaLM-2 significantly improves
the model performance on downstream tasks across different
model sizes, while simultaneously exhibiting faster and more
efficient inference than PaLM.
Med-PaLM [76] is a domain-specific PaLM, and is de-
signed to provide high-quality answers to medical questions.
Med-PaLM is finetuned on PaLM using instruction prompt
tuning, a parameter-efficient method for aligning LLMs to
new domains using a few exemplars. Med-PaLM obtains very
encouraging results on many healthcare tasks, although it is
still inferior to human clinicians. Med-PaLM 2 improves Med-
PaLM via med-domain finetuning and ensemble prompting
[77]. Med-PaLM 2 scored up to 86.5% on the MedQA
dataset (i.e., a benchmark combining six existing open ques-
tion answering datasets spanning professional medical exams,
research, and consumer queries), improving upon Med-PaLM
by over 19% and setting a new state-of-the-art.
C. Other Representative LLMs
In addition to the models discussed in the previous sub-
sections, there are other popular LLMs which do not belong
to those three model families, yet they have achieved great
performance and have pushed the LLMs field forward. We
briefly describe these LLMs in this subsection.
FLAN: In [78], Wei et al. explored a simple method for
improving the zero-shot learning abilities of language models.
They showed that instruction tuning language models on a
collection of datasets described via instructions substantially
improves zero-shot performance on unseen tasks. They take
a 137B parameter pretrained language model and instruction
tune it on over 60 NLP datasets verbalized via natural language
instruction templates. They call this instruction-tuned model
FLAN. Fig 15 provides a comparison of instruction tuning
with pretrain–finetune and prompting.
Fig. 15: comparison of instruction tuning with pre-
train–finetune and prompting. Courtesy of [78].
Gopher: In [79], Rae et al. presented an analysis of
Transformer-based language model performance across a wide
range of model scales — from models with tens of millions of
parameters up to a 280 billion parameter model called Gopher.
These models were evaluated on 152 diverse tasks, achieving
state-of-the-art performance across the majority. The number
of layers, the key/value size, and other hyper-parameters of
different model sizes are shown in Fig 16.
T0: In [80], Sanh et al. developed T0, a system for easily
mapping any natural language tasks into a human-readable
prompted form. They converted a large set of supervised