Fig. 26: High-level overview of transformer work. Courtesy of
[44].
CommonCrawl. They also released an extract of 600 billion
tokens from our REFINEDWEB dataset, and 1.3/7.5B param-
eters language models trained on it. 27 shows the Refinement
process of CommonCrawl data by this work.
Fig. 27: Subsequent stages of Macrodata Refinement remove
nearly 90% of the documents originally in CommonCrawl.
Courtesy of [124].
1) Data Filtering: Data filtering aims to enhance the qual-
ity of training data and the effectiveness of the trained LLMs.
Common data filtering techniques include:
Removing Noise: refers to eliminating irrelevant or noisy
data that might impact the model’s ability to generalize well.
As an example, one can think of removing false information
from the training data, to lower the chance of model generating
false responses. Two mainstream approaches for quality filter-
ing includes: classifier-based, and heuristic-based frameworks.
Handling Outliers: Identifying and handling outliers or
anomalies in the data to prevent them from disproportionately
influencing the model.
Addressing Imbalances: Balancing the distribution of
classes or categories in the dataset to avoid biases and ensure
fair representation. This is specially useful for responsible
model training and evaluation.
Text Preprocessing: Cleaning and standardizing text data
by removing stop words, punctuation, or other elements that
may not contribute significantly to the model’s learning.
Dealing with Ambiguities: Resolving or excluding am-
biguous or contradictory data that might confuse the model
during training. This can help the model to provide more
definite and reliable answers.
2) Deduplication: De-duplication refers to the process of
removing duplicate instances or repeated occurrences of the
same data in a dataset. Duplicate data points can introduce
biases in the model training process and reduce the diversity, as
the model may learn from the same examples multiple times,
potentially leading to overfitting on those particular instances.
Some works [125] have shown that de-duplication improves
models’ ability to generalize to new, unseen data.
The de-duplication process is particularly important when
dealing with large datasets, as duplicates can unintentionally
inflate the importance of certain patterns or characteristics.
This is especially relevant in NLP tasks, where diverse and
representative training data is crucial for building robust lan-
guage models.
The specific de-duplication method can vary based on
the nature of the data and the requirements of the particular
language model being trained. It may involve comparing entire
data points or specific features to identify and eliminate du-
plicates. At the document level, existing works mainly rely on
the overlap ratio of high-level features (e.g. n-grams overlap)
between documents to detect duplicate samples.
C. Tokenizations
Tokenization referes to the process of converting a se-
quence of text into smaller parts, known as tokens. While
the simplest tokenization tool simply chops text into tokens
based on white space, most tokenization tools rely on a word
dictionary. However, out-of-vocabulary (OOV) is a problem
in this case because the tokenizer only knows words in its
dictionary. To increase the coverage of dictionaries, popular
tokenizers used for LLMs are based on sub-words, which can
be combined to form a large number of words, including the
words unseen in training data or words in different languages.
In what follows, we describe three popular tokenizers.
1) BytePairEncoding: BytePairEncoding is originally a
type of data compression algorithm that uses frequent patterns
at byte level to compress the data. By definition, this algorithm
mainly tries to keep the frequent words in their original form
and break down ones that are not common. This simple
paradigm keeps the vocabulary not very large, but also good
enough to represent common words at the same time. Also
morphological forms of the frequent words can be represented
very well if suffix or prefix is also commonly presented in the
training data of the algorithm.