step, without considering the overall effect on the sequence.
This property makes it fast, but it also means that it can miss
out on better sequences that might have appeared with slightly
less probable next tokens.
2) Beam Search: Unlike greedy search that only considers
the next most probable token, beam search takes into account
the N most likely tokens, where N denotes the number of
beams. This procedure is repeated until a predefined maxi-
mum sequence length is reached or an end-of-sequence token
appears. At this point, the sequence of tokens (AKA “beam”)
with the highest overall score is chosen as the output. For
example for beam size of 2 and maximum length of 5,
the beam search needs to keep track of 25 = 32 possible
sequences. So it is more computationally intensive than greedy
search.
3) T op-k Sampling: Top-k sampling is a technique that
uses the probability distribution generated by the language
model to select a token randomly from the k most likely
options.
Suppose we have 6 tokens (A, B, C, D, E, F) and k=2,
and P(A)= 30%, and P(B)= 20%, P(C)= P(D)= P(E)= P(F)=
12.5%. In top-k sampling, tokens C, D, E, F are disregarded,
and the model outputs A 60% of the time, and B, 40% of
the time. This approach ensures that we prioritize the most
probable tokens while introducing an element of randomness
in the selection process.
The randomness is usually introduced via the concept of
temperature. The temperature T is a parameter that ranges from
0 to 1, which affects the probabilities generated by the softmax
function, making the most likely tokens more influential. In
practice, it simply consists of dividing the input logits by
temperature value:
sof tmax(xi) = exi/T
P
j exj /T (3)
A low temperature setting significantly alters the proba-
bility distribution (and is commonly used in text generation
to control the level of “creativity” in the generated output),
while a large temperature prioritizes the tokens with higher
probabilities. Top-k is a creative way of sampling, and can be
used along with beam search. The sequence chosen by top-
k sampling may not be the sequence with highest probability
in beam search. But it’s important to remember that highest
scores do not always lead to more realistic or meaningful
sequences.
4) T op-p Sampling: Top-p sampling, also known as Nu-
cleus sampling, takes a slightly different approach from top-k
sampling. Instead of selecting the top k most probable tokens,
nucleus sampling chooses a cutoff value p such that the sum of
the probabilities of the selected tokens exceeds p. This forms
a “nucleus” of tokens from which to randomly choose the next
token. In other words, in top-p sampling the language model
examines the most probable tokens in descending order and
keeps adding them to the list until the sum of probabilities
surpasses the threshold p. As you can imagine, this could be
better specially for scenarios in which top-k tokens do not have
a large probability mass. Unlike top-k sampling, the number
of tokens included in the nucleus sampling is not fixed. This
variability often results in a more diverse and creative output,
making nucleus sampling popular for text generation related
tasks.
I. Cost-Effective Training/Inference/Adaptation/Compression
In this part, we review some of the popular approaches
used for more cost-friendly (and compute-friendly) training
and usage of LLMs.
1) Optimized Training : There are many frameworks de-
veloped for optimized training of LLMs, here we introduce
some of the prominent ones.
ZeRO: In [140], Rajbhandari et al. developed a novel
solution, Zero Redundancy Optimizer (ZeRO), to optimize
memory, vastly improving training speed of LLMs while
increasing the model size that can be efficiently trained. ZeRO
eliminates memory redundancies in data- and model-parallel
training while retaining low communication volume and high
computational granularity, allowing one to scale the model
size proportional to the number of devices with sustained high
efficiency.
RWKV: In [141], Peng et al. proposed a novel model
architecture, Receptance Weighted Key Value (RWKV), that
combines the efficient parallelizable training of Transformers
with the efficient inference of RNNs. Their approach leverages
a linear attention mechanism and allows them to formulate the
model as either a Transformer or an RNN, which parallelizes
computations during training and maintains constant compu-
tational and memory complexity during inference, leading to
the first non-transformer architecture to be scaled to tens of
billions of parameters. RWKV architecture is shown in Fig
32. The Time Complexity comparison of RWKV with different
Fig. 32: RWKV architecture. Courtesy of [141].
Transformers are provided in Fig 33.