are a series of elementary calculations using basic
arithmetic operations.
• MATH [191] enables to assess how well models can
solve math problems. MATH dataset hast 12, 500
problems from high school math competitions. Each
problem in the dataset has a step-by-step solution and
a final answer enclosed in a box. The problems cover
a wide range of topics and have different levels of
complexity. There are seven subjects in total. Further-
more, the difficulty of each problem is rated based
on the AoPS standards on a scale from ′1′ to ′5′. A
′1′ shows the easiest problems in a subject, while ′5′
represents the most difficult. In terms of formatting,
all problems and solutions are presented using LATEX
and the Asymptote vector graphics language.
• HellaSwag [192] is designed to assess commonsense
reasoning in LLMs. This benchmark includes 70, 000
multiple-choice questions. Each question is derived
from one of two domains: ActivityNet or WikiHow,
and presents four answer choices regarding what
might happen in the following situation. The correct
answer provides an actual statement describing the
upcoming event, but the three wrong answers are
created to confuse machines.
• AI2 Reasoning Challenge (ARC) [193] is used
for commonsense reasoning. This benchmark encom-
passes 7, 787 science examination questions. These
questions are in English, and most of them are set
up in a multiple-choice format. The questions have
been divided into two groups: a Challenge Set with
2, 590 difficult questions and an Easy Set with 5,197
questions. Each collection has also been pre-divided
into Train, Development, and Test subsets.
• PIQA [194] is intended to evaluate the language
representations on their knowledge of physical com-
monsense. In this dataset, the focus is on everyday
situations with a preference for uncommon solutions.
The central task is a multiple-choice question answer-
ing, where a question (q) is provided along with two
potential solutions (s1, s2). Then, the best solution is
chosen by whether a model or a human. For each
question, only one of the solutions is the correct
answer.
• SIQA [195] provides a framework for evaluating mod-
els’ ability for commonsense reasoning about social
situations. SIQA dataset has 38, 000 multiple-choice
questions designed to assess emotional and social
intelligence in everyday circumstances. This dataset
covers a wide variety of social scenarios. In SIQA,
the potential answers is a mixture of human-selected
responses and machine-generated ones that have been
filtered through adversarial processes.
• OpenBookQA (OBQA) [196] is a new kind of
question-answering dataset where answering its ques-
tions requires additional common and commonsense
knowledge not contained in the book and rich text
comprehension. This dataset includes around 6,000
multiple-choice questions. Each question is linked to
one core fact, as well as an additional collection
of over 6000 facts. The questions were developed
using a multi-stage crowdsourcing and expert filter-
ing procedure. OpenBookQA questions are difficult
because they need multi-hop reasoning with limited
background.
• TruthfulQA [197] is designed specifically to eval-
uate the truthfulness of language models in gen-
erating answers to questions. This dataset includes
817 questions, written by authors, from 38 different
categories, including health, law, finance, and politics.
These questions are purposefully designed to chal-
lenge human responders, as they may contain common
misunderstandings that lead to incorrect answers.
• OPT-IML Bench [103] is a comprehensive bench-
mark for Instruction Meta-Learning. It covers 2000
NLP tasks from 8 existing benchmarks. The OPT-IML
Bench consists of a training set with 17.9 M examples,
a dev set with 145K samples, and a test set with 321K
samples.
C. Datasets for Augmented: using external knowledge/tools
This section focuses on datasets designed for the aug-
mented abilities of LLMs.
• HotpotQA [198] is designed to cover a diverse and
explainable question-answering dataset that necessi-
tates multi-hop reasoning. This dataset is derived from
the English Wikipedia. It consists of roughly 113, 000
questions. Each question in the dataset comes with
two paragraphs, called gold paragraphs, from two
Wikipedia articles. Also, there is a list of sentences
in those paragraphs that crowdworkers have picked as
important for answering the question.
• ToolQA [199] is a question answering benchmark
to evaluate LLMs’ ability to use external tools for
answering questions.
• GPT4Tools serves as an instructional dataset, gener-
ated by instructing advanced teachers (such as Chat-
GPT), with instructions conditioned on visual content
and tool descriptions. This process results in the
generation of instructions related to the use of tools.
There are three versions of this dataset. The first
version comprises 71,000 instruction-following data
points utilized to fine-tune the GPT4Tools model. The
next version consists of manually cleaned instruction
data used for validation, covering instructions related
to the tools from the first version. The last version is
cleaned instruction data used for testing and includes
instructions related to some tools that are not present
in the first version.
VI. P ROMINENT LLM S’ PERFORMANCE ON
BENCHMARKS
In this section we first provide an overview of some of
popular metrics used for evaluating the performance of LLMs
under different scenarios. We then look at the performance
of prominent large language models on some of the popular
datasets and benchmarks.