footprint, and save the time and resources required to train
a model from scratch.
Megatron-LM [223] is a large, powerful transformer
developed by the Applied Deep Learning Research team
at NVIDIA. It contains efficient, model-parallel (tensor, se-
quence, and pipeline), and multi-node pre-training of trans-
former based models such as GPT, BERT, and T5 using mixed
precision.
BMTrain [224] is an efficient large model training toolkit
that can be used to train large models with tens of billions of
parameters. It can train models in a distributed manner while
keeping the code as simple as stand-alone training.
GPT-NeoX [225] leverages many of the same features and
technologies as the popular Megatron-DeepSpeed library but
with substantially increased usability and novel optimizations.
LoRA [226] library provides the support for Low-Rank
Adaptation of Large Language Models. It reduces the number
of trainable parameters by learning pairs of rank-decompostion
matrices while freezing the original weights. This vastly
reduces the storage requirement for large language models
adapted to specific tasks and enables efficient task-switching
during deployment all without introducing inference latency.
LoRA also outperforms several other adaptation methods in-
cluding adapter, prefix-tuning, and fine-tuning.
ColossalAI library [227] provides a collection of parallel
components. It aims to support developers to write their
distributed deep learning models just like how they write their
model on their laptop. They provide user-friendly tools to
kickstart distributed training and inference in a few lines. In
terms of Parallelism strategies, they support: Data Parallelism,
Pipeline Parallelism, Sequence Parallelism, Zero Redundancy
Optimizer (ZeRO) [140], and Auto-Parallelism.
B. Deployment Tools
We provide an overview of some of the most popular LLM
deployment tools here.
FastChat [228] is an open platform for training, serv-
ing, and evaluating large language model based chatbots.
FastChat’s core features include: The training and evaluation
code for state-of-the-art models (e.g., Vicuna, MT-Bench), and
a distributed multi-model serving system with web UI and
OpenAI-compatible RESTful APIs.
Skypilot [229] is a framework for running LLMs, AI,
and batch jobs on any cloud, offering maximum cost savings,
highest GPU availability, and managed execution.
vLLM [230] is a fast and easy-to-use library for LLM in-
ference and serving. vLLM seamlessly supports many Hugging
Face models, including the following architectures: Aquila,
Baichuan, BLOOM, ChatGLM, DeciLM, Falcon, GPT Big-
Code, LLaMA, LLaMA 2, Mistral, Mixtral, MPT, OPT, Qwen,
Yi, and many more.
text-generation-inference [231] is a toolkit for deploying
and serving Large Language Models (LLMs). TGI enables
high-performance text generation for the most popular open-
source LLMs, including Llama, Falcon, StarCoder, BLOOM,
GPT-NeoX, and more.
LangChain [232] is a framework for developing applica-
tions powered by language models. It enables applications that:
• Are context-aware: connect a language model to
sources of context (prompt instructions, few shot ex-
amples, content to ground its response in, etc.)
• Reason: rely on a language model to reason (about
how to answer based on provided context, what ac-
tions to take, etc.)
OpenLLM [233] is an open-source platform designed to
facilitate the deployment and operation of large language mod-
els (LLMs) in real-world applications. With OpenLLM, you
can run inference on any open-source LLM, deploy them on
the cloud or on-premises, and build powerful AI applications.
Embedchain [234] is an Open Source RAG Framework
that makes it easy to create and deploy AI apps. Embedchain
streamlines the creation of RAG applications, offering a seam-
less process for managing various types of unstructured data.
It efficiently segments data into manageable chunks, generates
relevant embeddings, and stores them in a vector database for
optimized retrieval.
Autogen [235] is a framework that enables the devel-
opment of LLM applications using multiple agents that can
converse with each other to solve tasks. AutoGen agents
are customizable, conversable, and seamlessly allow human
participation. They can operate in various modes that employ
combinations of LLMs, human inputs, and tools.
BabyAGI [236] is an autonomous Artificial Intelligence
agent, that is designed to generate and execute tasks based on
given objectives. It harnesses cutting-edge technologies from
OpenAI, Pinecone, LangChain, and Chroma to automate tasks
and achieve specific goals. In this blog post, we will dive
into the unique features of BabyAGI and explore how it can
streamline task automation.
C. Prompting Libraries
Guidance [237] is a programming paradigm that offers
superior control and efficiency compared to conventional
prompting and chaining. It allows users to constrain generation
(e.g. with regex and CFGs) as well as to interleave control
(conditional, loops) and generation seamlessly.
PromptTools [238] offers a set of open-source, self-
hostable tools for experimenting with, testing, and evaluating
LLMs, vector databases, and prompts. The core idea is to
enable developers to evaluate using familiar interfaces like
code, notebooks, and a local playground.
PromptBench [?] is a Pytorch-based Python package for
Evaluation of Large Language Models (LLMs). It provides
user-friendly APIs for researchers to conduct evaluation on
LLMs.
Promptfoo [239] is a tool for testing and evaluating LLM
output quality. It systematically test prompts, models, and
RAGs with predefined test cases.