Text EncoderImage Encoder
ImageText
Image EncoderText Decoder
Image
Image Encoder
Image(a) CLIP(b) VirTex/SimVLM(c) CoCa
Text Encoder
Text
Text Decoder
Text
Contrastive lossCaptioning lossContrastive lossCaptioning loss
Figure 2.6: A high-level comparison of contrastive loss and captioning loss for image encoder pre-
training. (a) CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) uses contrastive loss alone for pre-training, which enables
zero-shot image classification and has demonstrated strong scaling behavior. (b) VirTex (Desai
and Johnson, 2021) uses captioning loss alone for pre-training. SimVLM (Wang et al., 2022g)
uses prefix language modeling for pre-training in a much larger scale. The model architecture is
similar to multimodal language models (e.g., GIT (Wang et al., 2022a) and Flamingo (Alayrac et al.,
2022)), but VirTex and SimVLM aim to pre-train the image encoder from scratch. (c) CoCa (Yu
et al., 2022a) uses both contrastive and captioning losses for pre-training. The model architecture
is similar to ALBEF (Li et al., 2021b), but CoCa aims to pre-train the image encoder from scratch,
instead of using a pre-trained one.
performance. LaCLIP (Fan et al., 2023a) shows that CLIP can be improved via rewriting the noisy
and short alt-text using large language models such as ChatGPT.
• Interpretability: The image representation is typically a dense feature vector. In order to im-
prove the interpretability of the shared image-text embedding space, STAIR (Chen et al., 2023a)
proposes to map images and text to a high-dimensional, sparse, embedding space, where each
dimension in the sparse embedding is a (sub-)word in a large dictionary in which the predicted
non-negative scalar corresponds to the weight associated with the token. The authors show that
STAIR achieves better performance than the vanilla CLIP with improved interpretability.
• More modalities: The idea of contrastive learning is general, and can go beyond just image and
text modalities. For example, as shown in Figure 2.5, ImageBind (Girdhar et al., 2023) proposes
to encode six modalities into a common embedding space, including images, text, audio, depth,
thermal, and IMU modalities. In practice, a pre-trained CLIP model is used and kept frozen
during training, which indicates that other modality encoders are learned to align to the CLIP
embedding space, so that the trained model can be applied to new applications such as audio-to-
image generation and multimodal LLMs (e.g., PandaGPT (Su et al., 2023)).
Objective function. The use of contrastive loss alone is powerful, especially when the model is
scaled up. However, other objective functions can also be applied.
• Fine-grained supervision: Instead of using a simple dot-product to calculate the similarity of an
image-text pair, the supervision can be made more fine-grained via learning word-patch alignment.
In FILIP (Yao et al., 2022b), the authors propose to first compute the loss by calculating the token-
wise similarity, and then aggregating the matrix by max-pooling for word-patch alignment.
• Contrastive captioner: Besides the contrastive learning branch, CoCa (Yu et al., 2022a) (shown
in Figure 2.6(c)) adds a generative loss to improve performance and allow new capabilities that
require multimodal fusion ( e.g., image captioning and VQA). This is similar to many fusion-
encoder-based vision-language models such as ALBEF (Li et al., 2021b), but with the key differ-
ence in that CoCa aims to learn a better image encoder from scratch. A detailed discussion on
multimodal fusion is in Section 2.6.1.
• Captioning loss alone: How about using the captioning loss alone to pre-train an image encoder?
Actually, before CLIP was invented, VirTex (Desai and Johnson, 2021) (shown in Figure 2.6(b))
and ICMLM (Sariyildiz et al., 2020) learn encoders using a single image captioning loss, but the
scale is very small (restricted to COCO images) and the performance is poor. CLIP also shows
that contrastive pre-training is a much better choice. In SimVLM (Wang et al., 2022g), the authors
17