Figure 3.8: Examples of text instruction editing. Image credit: Brooks et al. (2023).
Figure 3.9: The editing data generation pipeline proposed in InstructPix2Pix. Image credit: Brooks
et al. (2023).
layer. The main challenge is how to generate paired editing data. As shown in Figure 3.9, Instruct-
Pix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023) proposes to use a LMM (Brown et al., 2020) to generate a pair of
an editing instruction and an edited caption from the original input caption, e.g., “have her ride a
dragon,” “photograph of a girl riding a dragon,” and “photograph of a girl riding a horse.” The
study then uses Prompt2Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022) to convert the original and edited caption pair
to a pair of images before and after editing, corresponding to the GPT-generated editing instruction.
The study generates over 450K samples to train the editing model. This data generation method has
also been adopted in subsequent research, such as CM3Leon (Ge et al., 2023) for training general-
purpose image-text-to-image models.
Editing with external pre-trained models. Furthermore, recent studies show the efficacy of incor-
porating external language and vision models for editing, as opposed to relying solely on a single
model. Advancements in generalist segmentation models, such as SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) and
SEEM (Zou et al., 2023b), have paved the way for using segmentation models to ground the re-
gion for text-based editing. Representative works include Instruct X-Decoder (Zou et al., 2023a),
Grounded SAM inpainting (Liu et al., 2023h), Inpaint anything (Yu et al., 2023c), etc.. Another
emerging trend is the allocation of various generation and editing tools through LMM. Studies such
as VisualChatGPT (Wu et al., 2023a) can solve complicated visual editing that requires the collabo-
ration of multiple generation and editing models in multiple steps.
Summary and trends. Text-based editing models have made significant progress in their capa-
bilities, leading to improved editing quality, expanded domain coverage, and more flexible user
interface. For example, early studies require user-generated masks for object editing, while recent
models can work on synthetically generated images without mask inputs, or even directly under-
stand general text editing instructions. As we look to the future, we anticipate an all-encompassing
generative foundation model that is capable of processing both image and text inputs. Within this
framework, editing instructions would be a specialized form of text input, seamlessly integrated with
the image description in T2I generation.
3.4 Text Prompts Following
Training with image-text pairs encourages T2I models to generate images that semantically corre-
spond to the input text condition. However, the image generation training objective does not directly
enforce generated images to exactly follow text prompts. Studies (Feng et al., 2022b; Chefer et al.,
35