Bridge vision 
with language
Take various 
prompts
Unify different 
granularities
Intuition: language as the 
common space to share 
information 
Benefit: Zero-shot transfer 
to novel vocabularies 
Intuition: vision is multi-
task, multi-granularity
Benefit: Build synergy 
across task granularities
Intuition: language, visual 
prompts and beyond
Benefit: Reduce the 
ambiguity of expressing 
human intents
Figure 4.1: In NLP, we have witnessed a clear trend to build a unified model such as GPT-3 (Brown
et al., 2020) and then the sophisticated Human-AI interaction system ChatGPT, which has ignited the
interests of the whole community and society in AI. A natural question for computer vision (CV) is
whether we can unify all different types of vision tasks such as image classification, object detection,
segmentation and visual question answering,etc., and likewise build an interaction interface between
CV models and humans. Aspired by this, a lot of attempts have been made recently to crack the
problem from different angles including but not limited to (a) making vision models open-set; (b)
unifying different granularities; and (c) turning the models more promptable.
• Bridging vision and language . By extending closed-set classification to open-world recogni-
tion, the contrastive language-image models like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) demonstrate impres-
sive zero-shot transferability for different vision tasks. These models learn the mapping between
raw visual signals and rich semantics and can power various open-vocabulary vision recognition
tasks (Zhong et al., 2022b; Gu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022f; Ghiasi et al., 2022b).
• Unified multi-task modeling . Traditional task-specific vision models are trained using task-
specific data. It is often prohibitively expensive to develop a model for a new task. Thus, it is
desirable to develop a unified vision model that can perform well across many vision tasks (Yang
et al., 2022c; Lu et al., 2022a; Zou et al., 2023a; Chen et al., 2022c).
• LLM-like promptable interface. LLMs can take different language and in-context prompts as in-
puts and produce user-desired outputs without finetuning. A general-purpose vision model should
have possessed the same in-context learning capability to align the output to various user intents
without changing its model parameters (Bar et al., 2022; Kirillov et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023b;
Wang et al., 2023j; Balaˇzevi´c et al., 2023).
In what follows, we will elaborate the detailed techniques and methods in each category.
4.2 From Closed-Set to Open-Set Models
Traditionally, visual recognition is formulated as a classification problem that maps raw visual data
(e.g., images) to discrete text labels. For example, image classification predicts a label from a pre-
defined close set for a whole image (Deng et al., 2009), and object detection identifies the objects,
defined in a close set, within an image (Lin et al., 2014). However, such closed-set models can
hardly transfer to other tasks where the close set (or vocabulary) is insufficient. For example, it
is difficult to apply an object detector trained using the Microsoft COCO object set 2 to detect
Minecraft objects. Recently, CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) addresses the limitation of closed-set
models by introducing a contrastive language-image pre-training method to train anopen-set model.
As illustrated in Figure 4.2 (a), instead of learning the mapping from input to labels, CLIP learns
an aligned visual-semantic space using hundreds of millions of image-text pairs. Mathematically,
2https://cocodataset.org/
43