Replace labels with texts, and use text encoder to 
encode all concepts as they are language tokens
(a)
semantic
Image Region Pixel
Label e.g, ViT
e.g., UniCL
e.g., DETR e.g., Mask2Former
e.g., GLIP e.g., OpenSeeD
Image Classification Object Detection Image Segmentation
granularity
Text
 (b)
Figure 4.2: (a) As proposed in CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), replacing labels with textual descriptions
and using a text encoder to encode them can feasibly convert closed-set problems to open-set ones.
Image credit from Yang et al. (2022b). (b) A number of works have been proposed to transform dif-
ferent computer vision tasks by replacing the label space with language space, such as UniCL (Yang
et al., 2022b), GLIP (Li et al., 2022f) and OpenSeeD (Zhang et al., 2023e).
the traditional vision tasks optimize the log-likelihood of assigning label y = c to an image, often
represented as a feature vector u ∈ R P :
log P(y = c|u) = log expwc·u
PK
i=1 expwi·u
, (4.1)
where w ∈ R K×P is the projection matrix. Instead of using a pre-determined project matrix w, the
CLIP method uses a text encoder Enctext to for the projection:
vi = Enctext(Concept i), (4.2)
where v plays the role of w in Eq. (4.1). The reason why a text encoder can help achieve open-set
recognition is that all textual concepts are embedded in the same feature space through large-scale
pre-training, and the feature distributions are coherent to the semantic meanings without the need of
a pre-defined vocabulary. As such, the aligned visual-semantic space can be easily transferred to a
wide range of image recognition tasks in a zero-shot manner. Please refer to Chapter 2 for a detailed
discussion. In the following, we focus our discussion on the region-level and pixel-level models.
After the release of the CLIP model (Radford et al., 2021), a number of open-set vision models have
been developed using large amounts of text-image pairs for visual understanding at different levels
of granularity (Yang et al., 2022b; Zhang et al., 2023e; Li et al., 2022f; Ghiasi et al., 2022a), rang-
ing from image-level tasks (e.g., image classification Deng et al. (2009), image-text retrieval, image
captioning Chen et al. (2015)), region-level localization ( e.g., object detection and phrase ground-
ing Plummer et al. (2015)), to pixel-level grouping tasks ( e.g., image segmentation and referring
segmentation Long et al. (2015); Kirillov et al. (2019); Hafiz and Bhat (2020)). These models can
be categorized along the following three dimensions: model initialization, design and training.
Model initialization. There are different initialization methods for open-set model training.
• CLIP initialized. Many recent open-set models are trained by using a pre-trained model such
as CLIP for initialization since a pre-trained model already provides a well-aligned (but often
coarse-grained) visual-semantic feature space. For example, OVR-CNN (Zareian et al., 2021)
and RegionCLIP (Zhong et al., 2022b) use a CLIP-style pre-trained ResNet (He et al., 2016) as
the vision encoder and a pre-trained RPN (Ren et al., 2015) to extract regional features. Like-
wise, MaskCLIP (Zhou et al., 2022a) and FreeSeg (Qin et al., 2023b) exploit the CLIP model
to extract dense labels for pixels. FC-CLIP (Yu et al., 2023a) uses a frozen convolution network
ConvNeXt (Liu et al., 2022b) in CLIP to encode input images of various resolutions.
• CLIP augmented. Instead of initializing a model with CLIP parameters, other methods initialize
the model parameters as usually (e.g., setting random values to model parameters), but use the
pre-trained CLIP to help model training.For example, ViLD (Gu et al., 2022) augments the model
44