with aligned CLIP features via knowledge-distillation. MaskCLIP (Ding et al., 2022b) and Mask-
Adapted CLIP Liang et al. (2023a) rely on the pre-trained CLIP model to provide features and
scores, respectively, during the course of model training.
• Other works learn a visual-semantic feature space using supervised pre-trained models or from
scratch. For example, GLIP (Li et al., 2022f) and OpenSeeD (Zhang et al., 2023e) use a pre-trained
BERT model (Devlin et al., 2019) and the CLIP text encoder, respectively, and use a vision back-
bone pre-trained on ImageNet for image encoding. Though these separately pre-trained image and
text encoders do not explicitly learn the alignment between image and language, it turns out that
these models still give good representations for images and texts, and are instrumental to efficient
model training. Differently, GroupViT (Xu et al., 2022a) is trained jointly using an open-set se-
mantic segmentation task and a global image-text alignment task from scratch. ODISE (Xu et al.,
2023a) exploits pre-trained Stable Diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022) to extract compact
masks.
Model design. Open-set models can be either multi-stage or end-to-end.
• Two-stage models. These models usually follow the design of the pre-DETR based models (Ren
et al., 2015; He et al., 2017), which decouples localization and recognition. For object detection, a
region proposal network is typically pre-trained for localizing the object of interest (Zhong et al.,
2022b; Gu et al., 2021), and a mask proposal network for extracting masks (Ghiasi et al., 2022a;
Yao et al., 2022a). Given the localization results, a pre-trained CLIP model is used to measure
the similarity between visual contents and language concepts. A clear advantage for two-stage
models is that they can inherit the open-set semantic understanding capacity without additional
training so as to devote modeling training to requiring a well-performed localization network.
• End-to-end models. Different from two-stage models, the end-to-end models follow the DETR-
based methods (Carion et al., 2020; Cheng et al., 2022) or other one-stage models (Dai et al.,
2021). GLIP (Li et al., 2022f) is one of the representative works. GLIP formulates object detec-
tion as textual grounding and is trained end-to-end on image-text pairs with detection and ground-
ing labels. Follow-up works enhance GLIP by enabling deeper vision-language interactions (Liu
et al., 2023h) or using DETR-like model design (Zang et al., 2022; Minderer et al., 2022). For
segmentation, both ZegFormer (Ding et al., 2022a) and OpenSeeD (Zhang et al., 2023e) exploit
a DETR-like architecture and predict the masks and categories based on the outputs of their de-
coders.
Model pre-training. There are mainly three learning methods for pre-training open-set vision
models.
• Supervised learning. By converting label supervision to language supervision, many works di-
rectly leverage the existing supervised annotations for training open-set models. For example,
OVR-CNN (Zareian et al., 2021) trains a model with COCO categories and then evaluates its per-
formance on novel categories. Likewise, ViLD (Gu et al., 2021) trains and evaluates two separate
models on COCO and LVIS datasets, respectively. Following a similar protocol, many works
train the open-set segmentation models on a subset of annotated segmentation data and evaluate
the generalization ability on held-out data (Ding et al., 2022a,b; Zhang et al., 2023e; Xu et al.,
2023a).
• Semi-supervised learning. One might use both annotated data and unlabeled or weakly-labeled
data. For example, both RegionCLIP (Zhong et al., 2022b) and GLIP (Li et al., 2022f) use a
teacher model to extract fine-grained region-text alignments from image-text pairs to augment
the training data for better open-set detection performance. Differently, OpenSeg (Ghiasi et al.,
2022b) exploits Localized Narrative datasets (Pont-Tuset et al., 2020) as weakly-labeled data,
which provides coarse correspondence between language phrases and strokes in images. Empir-
ically, such semi-supervised learning methods often help improve models’ generalization ability
because they can effectively leverage rich semantics from noisy data.
• Weakly-supervised learning. Some works solely use weakly-labeled data for modeling. For
example, GroupViT (Xu et al., 2022a) uses a contrastive learning method where all supervisions
for model training are from positive and negative image-text pairs. Following the same contrastive
learning method, SegCLIP (Luo et al., 2023b) uses a gathering mechanism to learn to merge image
patches through the training on image-text pairs.
45