Tasks: [A, B,…, Z]I/O Unification
BA Z
B’A’ Z’
Inputs
Outputs
Functional Unification
B’A’ Z’
Outputs
routers
BA Z
Inputs
Homogenous token sequence
decoders
Heterogenous output formats
…
…
…
…
Figure 4.7: Side-by-side comparison between I/O unification and functionality unification. I/O uni-
fication is aimed at utilizing a decoder to decode homogeneous token sequences, which are then
decoded by task-specific decoders. In contrast, functionality unification predicts heterogeneous out-
puts and then uses different routers or headers to produce the final outputs for various tasks.
specific or modality-specific tokenizers but requires a sophisticated model design to accommodate
various tasks.
Figure 4.7 illustrates the difference between the two categories of unification methods. For I/O uni-
fication, the I/O unification module always generates a sequence of tokens, and exploits a separate
decoder to decode the final outputs for different tasks. For functionality unification, the functional
unification module generates heterogeneous outputs for different task, e.g., semantic outputs and
spatial outputs. Then, these different types of outputs are combined to produce the final task-specific
outputs. Both unification methods strive to make use of synergy across tasks with different levels
of granularity. For example, coarse-grained data is expected to contribute to rich semantic under-
standing required by fine-grained tasks, while fine-trained data to enhance the grounding ability for
coarse-grained tasks. In the following, we review some recent works of these two categories.
4.3.1 I/O Unification
This line of work is mainly inspired by LLMs that unify many NLP tasks as sequential modeling. In
the vision domain. the methods of building generic models via I/O unification can be grouped into
two categories depending on the tasks of interest and output formats.
Sparse and discrete outputs
For vision tasks that produce sparse or discrete token outputs, we can easily exploit a language
tokenizer, such as byte-pair encoding (BPE) (Sennrich et al., 2016), for I/O unification. In contrast,
spatial outputs like boxes, masks, or human skeletons can be formulated as a sequence of numeric
coordinates which are then tokenized into discrete tokens (Cho et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022c; Liu
et al., 2023e). As a result, the decoded output tokens are interleaved with organic textual tokens and
numeric textual tokens to support a wide range of tasks. Without the loss of generality, the decoding
process is formulated as auto-regressive generation and the model trained with the objective function
defined as:
L(θ) = −
TX
t=1
log p(st|s<t, v; θ), (4.3)
where {s}T
t=1 is the discrete token sequence of length T , and v is the visual feature. Below, we
review some representative works.
UniTab (Yang et al., 2022c) unifies text and box output in a sequence decoding manner. As shown
in Figure 4.8 (a), the box coordinates are represented by numerical numbers with <> and then a
special token <obj> is used to encompass the location information. In this way, the model can
unify a variety of tasks that require textual and location outputs, including image captioning (Chen
50