(a) VQ-V AE
(b) VQ-GAN
Figure 4.10: Illustration of VQ-V AE (Oord et al., 2017) and VQ-GAN (Esser et al., 2021).
Dense and continuous outputs
There are also some tasks that require dense and continuous outputs, such as image segmentation (He
et al., 2017), depth estimation (Mertan et al., 2022), image inpainting and editing (Elharrouss et al.,
2020; Brooks et al., 2023). Except for segmentation masks which can be approximated by poly-
gons (Liu et al., 2023e; Chen et al., 2022d), most dense and continuous outputs cannot be easily
converted into discrete tokens due to the high-dimensional space. Thus, we have to resort to an
image-oriented tokenizer. Akin to the language tokenizer, an image tokenizer encodes raw images
and extracts discrete tokens spanning the visual feature space. The most representative work is
VQ-V AE (Oord et al., 2017; Razavi et al., 2019). As shown in Figure 4.10 (a), VQ-V AE learns an
encoder ze, a decoder zq and a discrete codebook e = {e1, ..., eK} consisting of K embeddings.
Given the input x, the posterior categorical probability q(z|x) is defined as:
q(z = k|x) =
1, for k = argmini ∥ze(x) − ei∥.
0, otherwise. (4.4)
where the decoder zq takes x (or its representation ek) as input to predict class label. As a variant of
VQ-V AE, VQ-GAN uses a discriminator and the perceptual loss (Larsen et al., 2016; Lamb et al.,
2016) to maintain a good balance between output quality and model efficiency (via high compression
rate). In Figure 4.10 (b), we see that the discriminator is applied at the patch level to regularize the
decoding of images at high resolution. Below, we discuss some most recent works that attempt to
unify different vision and multi-modal tasks that involve dense outputs.
UViM (Kolesnikov et al., 2022) is one of the first works that employ a dense decoding process to
unify various core vision tasks, including panoptic segmentation, depth estimation and colorization.
The learning process consists of two stages: (i) Base encoder-decoder f and restricted oracle Ω are
learned to predict outputs given input images, where f takes raw image as input and Ω takes the
desired output as input to decode the oracle code; (ii) Instead of using the desired output as input to
the oracle Ω, the model learns a language model to produce the oracle code for the input raw image.
Notably, the encoder-decoder model used here is trained with VQ-V AE objectives. As the first step
to unify vision tasks with a single model, UViM shows promising results on three vision tasks.
Unified-IO (Lu et al., 2022a) is another representative work. Compared to UVIM, it scales to many
more vision tasks and datasets. Unlike the training procedure of UViM, Unified-IO first trains differ-
52