Figure 4.16: Visual prompting via visual inpainting proposed in Bar et al. (2022). Image credit: Bar
et al. (2022).
4.4.2 In-context Prompting
The in-context learning capability has been observed in many LLMs such as GPT-3 (Radford et al.,
2019), which makes the model more configurable via prompting without any model parameter up-
dates. In contrast, till now, the in-context learning capability for vision models is still less studied.
Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022) is one of the pioneering works that demonstrate in-context language
generation for multi-modal inputs, which is acquired by learning from interleaved image-text pair
data. Likewise, Kosmos-1 (Huang et al., 2023b) is another work that takes visual inputs as a foreign
language so that the in-context learning ability in LLMs can be naturally translated to multi-modal
inputs. However, both methods take multi-modal data as inputs but merely generate texts as outputs.
As we discussed earlier, vision tasks require outputs of different types beyond texts. How to endow
the in-context learning ability for vision systems is still an open question. Below, we review some
recent attempts toward the goal.
Visual prompting via inpainting is proposed in Bar et al. (2022) to teach the model to predict
dense outputs, such as edges, masks, depths, etc. as shown in Figure 4.16. Given an input image
x ∈ R H×W ×3 and a binary mask m ∈ { 0, 1}H×W , an inpainting model is to predict the missing
region y = f(x, m). The authors exploit a pre-trained VQ-GAN to encode the original image into
discrete tokens and ask another ViT encoder to predict the masked regions. To make sure the model
understands the visual “context” in the images, the authors collected a new dataset calledComputer
Vision Figures dataset which consists of 88k images from Arxiv papers. After pre-training, the
model is used to predict the content at the bottom-right corner.
Concurrently, Painter (Wang et al., 2023i) extends a similar idea of visual in-context learning to
more diverse datasets and benchmarks. Unlike Bar et al. (2022), it predicts the output in the contin-
uous pixel space instead of discrete tokens. For different tasks, the authors define rules to convert the
output spaces into image spaces. For example, it uses different colors to represent different individ-
ual instances in the image for the segmentation task. After unifying the input and output format, the
authors use vanilla ViT as the encoder and masked image modeling (He et al., 2022a). A follow-up
work called SegGPT (Wang et al., 2023j) is built on top of Painter and designed specifically for
image segmentation tasks. The pre-trained model can be easily extended for exemplar-based image
segmentation tasks.
Hummingbird (Balaˇzevi´c et al., 2023) resorts to a different method for in-context visual learning.
Instead of using masked modeling, the authors propose to leverage attention across target and source
images to aggregate the information. As shown in Figure 4.18, the models take multiple input images
(first row) and corresponding semantic label maps (second row). Given a query image, it first finds
the nearest neighbor feature locations in the prompt images for the query points and then projects
the same matches to the semantic label maps so as to aggregate the label for the target query. This
58