Multitask Instruct with Established Datasets
InstructViT
MultiInstructInstructBLIPMultimodal GPT
mPlug-OwlMultitask Instruct with Established Academic Datasets/Tasks•mPlug-Owl: Modularization empowers large language models with multimodality•InstructBLIP: Towards general-purpose vision-language models with instruction tuning•MultiInstruct: Improving Multi-Modal Zero-Shot Learning via Instruction Tuning
•Multimodal-gpt: A vision and language model for dialogue with humans•Instruction-ViT: Multi-Modal Prompts for Instruction Learning in ViT
Two existing purposes for Instruct Tuning:•User-oriented tasks: Daily conversation•Academic tasks: Existing datasets
Figure 5.12: The vision-language tasks covered in InstructBLIP. Image credit: Dai et al. (2023b).
sively enhance its quality on-the-fly. Similar to the “less is more” observation in LIMA (Zhou et al.,
2023a) from the NLP domain, InstructionGPT-4 shows that the quality of the instruction-tuning
data is more important than its quantity, where they finetune a better version of MiniGPT-4 with 200
high-quality samples (6%), selected from the 3500 samples used in the original MiniGPT-4.
Multitask Instruct with Established Academic Datasets/Tasks
As discussed earlier in Section 5.2, instruction tuning in the language domains is implemented in
two different ways: finetuning the model on a wide range of tasks using human-annotated prompts
and feedback (Ouyang et al., 2022), or supervised finetuning using public benchmarks and datasets
augmented with manually or automatically generated instructions (Wang et al., 2022f). The former
is good at user-oriented daily life tasks, and the latter is good at achieving decent performance on
established benchmarks. LLaV A and MiniGPT-4 fall into the former class. Several other works
either target for the latter class or combine both classes, including MultiInstruct (Xu et al., 2022b),
mPlug-OWL (Ye et al., 2023b), InstructBLIP (Dai et al., 2023b), Multimodal-GPT (Gong et al.,
2023), Instruction-ViT (Xiao et al., 2023) and Qwen-VL (Bai et al., 2023a).
For example, MultiInstruct is an early attempt before open-source LLaMA for instruction tun-
ing with multimodal datasets. InstructBLIP is a recent work that combines chat and benchmark
instruction-following data. As shown in Figure 5.12, InstructBLIP transforms 26 publicly available
datasets, covering a wide variety of tasks and capabilities, into instruction tuning format. Trained
on 13 held-in datasets, InstructBLIP attains SoTA zero-shot performance across all 13 held-out
datasets, substantially outperforming BLIP-2 and larger Flamingo models. Qwen-VL scales up both
image-text pair data for pre-traning and academic datasets for multi-task pre-traning, and achieve
excellent performance on many tasks.
Multimodal In-Context-Learning
Similar to the behavior of LLMs, which can address a language task by processing examples of the
task in their text prompt, multimodal in-context-learning refers to an visual and text interface that can
steer the model towards solving a multimodal task. Given a few example pairs of visual inputs and
expected text responses composed in the multimodal prompt, the model can be queried with a ques-
tion about a new image or video, and then generate an answer. The direction to extend in-context-
learning from language to multi-modalities has been explored, including OpenFlamingo (Awadalla
et al., 2023), Otter (Li et al., 2023d), M 3IT (Li et al., 2023j), MetaVL (Monajatipoor et al., 2023)
and Sparkles (Huang et al., 2023d).
73