Evolution of modeling paradigm. As summarized in Figure 6.1, we are witnessing the transition
from task-specific models towards general-purpose assistants across language, vision, and multi-
modal research.
We started with task-specific models that are trained on small-scale well-annotated data. This
results in dedicated models (Anderson et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019a; Yu et al., 2019) for each task or
even each dataset.
We then transitioned to the phase of pre-trained models, with the pretrain-then-finetune paradigm
widely adopted across both NLP and vision-language (VL) research. During pre-training, the model
can take advantages of large-scale, web-crawled noisy data, for example, millions to billions of
image-text pairs (Chen et al., 2020d; Wang et al., 2022a), or billions of text tokens (Devlin et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2019). However, it is still mostly task-specific finetuned, requiring similarly small-
scale, well-annotated data as the ones used in training task-specific models. This paradigm has led
to many well-known models, such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) in
NLP, and UNITER (Chen et al., 2020d), OSCAR (Li et al., 2020b) in VL. These early VL founda-
tion models were considered to be large-scale (trained with 10M image-text pairs), but may be of
intermediate or even small size in today’s view (billions of pairs).
Nowadays, we are entering a new era of generalist modeling, where the pre-training has been fur-
ther scaled up to trillions of text tokens (Gao et al., 2023b). For downstream adaptation, these gen-
eralist models have shown strong performance with in-context few-shot learning on a few demon-
stration examples, or even zero-shot evaluation. These models are what we now refer as large lan-
guage/multimodal models, including the GPT family (OpenAI, 2022, 2023a), PaLM family (Chowd-
hery et al., 2022; Driess et al., 2023), LLaMa (Touvron et al., 2023), Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022).
Based on the generalist models, the pipeline of building instruction-following models covered in
Chapter 5, similarly follows the pretrain-then-finetune paradigm. For example, Alpaca (Taori et al.,
2023), is built on top of the pre-trained LLaMa (Touvron et al., 2023), then finetuned on a smaller-
scale instruction tuning dataset. Similarly, for instruction-following VL models ( e.g. LLaV A (Li
et al., 2023e)), an additional stage of image-text alignment pre-training is introduced to align the
visual representations to the frozen LLM first, followed by visual instruction tuning.
New modeling paradigm: chaining tools with LLM. LLMs (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery
et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023a) have demonstrated exceptional abilities to tackle new tasks with only a
few examples or textual instructions, showing the promise of serving as general-purpose foundations
for many applications. Despite being versatile and impressive, they encounter challenges with the
basic functionalities, such as mathematical reasoning and information retrieval. Furthermore, a
fundamental limitation of not only LLMs but also other large-scale models nowadays, is that they
only represent the world described by their training data, which will inevitably become outdated
over time. Regularly re-training the model with the latest information is simply not feasible.
Meanwhile, many tasks with real-world impact cannot be readily tackled by by LLMs alone. For
example, accessing up-to-date information and performing computations, can be done via existing
tools (e.g. , search engine or calculator). Hence, recent research in language modeling has explored
a new modeling paradigm by supplementing LLMs with external NLP tools (Nakano et al., 2021;
Huang et al., 2022b; Ahn et al., 2022), including calculators, search engines, translation systems,
calendars, or even API calls on other models.
The above studies mainly focus on a single modality, i.e., language, in which the output of the tools
are in text format, thereby can naturally be fed into LLMs as additional knowledge. However, we live
in a multimodal world and a truly intelligent agent should be able to perform advanced multimodal
reasoning and actions. How to enable LLMs with perception of multimodal signals via tool using,
is the focus of the remaining part of this chapter.
6.2 Multimodal Agent
There are several representative works on building multimodal agent with tool use of vision experts,
including VISPROG (Gupta and Kembhavi, 2022b), Visual ChatGPT (Wu et al., 2023a) and MM-
ReAct (Yang* et al., 2023). VISPROG is the very first work on using programming language to
chain different vision tools with a LLM. Visual ChatGPT enables dialogue-based image editing by
78