Fig. 3: Overall pre-training and fine-tuning procedures for
BERT. Courtesy of [24]
Fig. 4: A comparison between replaced token detection and
masked language modeling. Courtesy of [46].
CODEX, and WebGPT. Although early GPT models, such as
GPT-1 and GPT-2, are open-source, recent models, such as
GPT-3 and GPT-4, are close-source and can only be accessed
via APIs. GPT-1 and GPT-2 models have been discussed in
the early PLM subsection. We start with GPT-3 below.
GPT-3 [56] is a pre-trained autoregressive language model
with 175 billion parameters. GPT-3 is widely considered as
the first LLM in that not only it is much larger than previous
PLMs, but also for the first time demonstrates emergent
abilities that are not observed in previous smaller PLMs. GPT-
3 shows the emergent ability of in-context learning, which
means GPT-3 can be applied to any downstream tasks without
any gradient updates or fine-tuning, with tasks and few-shot
demonstrations specified purely via text interaction with the
model. GPT-3 achieved strong performance on many NLP
tasks, including translation, question-answering, and the cloze
tasks, as well as several ones that require on-the-fly reasoning
or domain adaptation, such as unscrambling words, using a
novel word in a sentence, 3-digit arithmetic. Fig 9 plots the
performance of GPT-3 as a function of the number of examples
in in-context prompts.
CODEX [57], released by OpenAI in March 2023, is a
general-purpose programming model that can parse natural
language and generate code in response. CODEX is a de-
scendant of GPT-3, fine-tuned for programming applications
on code corpora collected from GitHub. CODEX powers
Microsoft’s GitHub Copilot.
WebGPT [58] is another descendant of GPT-3, fine-tuned to
answer open-ended questions using a text-based web browser,
facilitating users to search and navigate the web. Specifically,
Fig. 5: Cross-lingual language model pretraining. The MLM
objective is similar to BERT, but with continuous streams
of text as opposed to sentence pairs. The TLM objective
extends MLM to pairs of parallel sentences. To predict a
masked English word, the model can attend to both the English
sentence and its French translation, and is encouraged to align
English and French representations. Courtesy of [47].
Fig. 6: Overview of unified LM pre-training. The model
parameters are shared across the LM objectives (i.e., bidirec-
tional LM, unidirectional LM, and sequence-to-sequence LM).
Courtesy of [49].
WebGPT is trained in three steps. The first is for WebGPT
to learn to mimic human browsing behaviors using human
demonstration data. Then, a reward function is learned to
predict human preferences. Finally, WebGPT is refined to
optimize the reward function via reinforcement learning and
rejection sampling.
To enable LLMs to follow expected human instructions,
InstructGPT [59] is proposed to align language models with
user intent on a wide range of tasks by fine-tuning with
human feedback. Starting with a set of labeler-written prompts
and prompts submitted through the OpenAI API, a dataset
of labeler demonstrations of the desired model behavior is
collected. Then GPT-3 is fine-tuned on this dataset. Then, a
dataset of human-ranked model outputs is collected to further
fine-tune the model using reinforcement learning. The method
is known Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF), as shown in 10. The resultant InstructGPT models
have shown improvements in truthfulness and reductions in
toxic output generation while having minimal performance