Fig. 16: Model architecture details of Gopher with different
number of parameters. Courtesy of [78].
datasets, each with multiple prompts with diverse wording.
These prompted datasets allow for benchmarking the ability
of a model to perform completely held-out tasks. Then, a
T0 encoder-decoder model is developed to consume textual
inputs and produces target responses. The model is trained on
a multitask mixture of NLP datasets partitioned into different
tasks.
ERNIE 3.0: In [81], Sun et al. proposed a unified frame-
work named ERNIE 3.0 for pre-training large-scale knowledge
enhanced models. It fuses auto-regressive network and auto-
encoding network, so that the trained model can be easily tai-
lored for both natural language understanding and generation
tasks using zero-shot learning, few-shot learning or fine-tuning.
They have trained ERNIE 3.0 with 10 billion parameters
on a 4TB corpus consisting of plain texts and a large-scale
knowledge graph. Fig 17 illustrates the model architecture of
Ernie 3.0.
Fig. 17: High-level model architecture of ERNIE 3.0. Courtesy
of [81].
RETRO: In [82], Borgeaud et al. enhanced auto-regressive
language models by conditioning on document chunks re-
trieved from a large corpus, based on local similarity with pre-
ceding tokens. Using a 2-trillion-token database, the Retrieval-
Enhanced Transformer (Retro) obtains comparable perfor-
mance to GPT-3 and Jurassic-1 [83] on the Pile, despite using
25% fewer parameters. As shown in Fig 18, Retro combines
a frozen Bert retriever, a differentiable encoder and a chunked
cross-attention mechanism to predict tokens based on an order
of magnitude more data than what is typically consumed
during training.
GLaM: In [84], Du et al. proposed a family of LLMs
named GLaM (Generalist Language Model), which use a
sparsely activated mixture-of-experts architecture to scale the
Fig. 18: Retro architecture. Left: simplified version where a
sequence of length n = 12 is split into l = 3 chunks of size
m = 4. For each chunk, we retrieve k = 2 neighbours of r =
5 tokens each. The retrieval pathway is shown on top. Right:
Details of the interactions in the CCA operator. Causality is
maintained as neighbours of the first chunk only affect the last
token of the first chunk and tokens from the second chunk.
Courtesy of [82].
model capacity while also incurring substantially less training
cost compared to dense variants. The largest GLaM has 1.2
trillion parameters, which is approximately 7x larger than GPT-
3. It consumes only 1/3 of the energy used to train GPT-3 and
requires half of the computation flops for inference, while still
achieving better overall zero, one and few-shot performance
across 29 NLP tasks. Fig 19 shows the high-level architecture
of GLAM.
Fig. 19: GLaM model architecture. Each MoE layer (the
bottom block) is interleaved with a Transformer layer (the
upper block). Courtesy of [84].
LaMDA: In [85], Thoppilan et al. presented LaMDA, a
family of Transformer-based neural language models special-
ized for dialog, which have up to 137B parameters and are
pre-trained on 1.56T words of public dialog data and web text.
They showed that fine-tuning with annotated data and enabling
the model to consult external knowledge sources can lead to
significant improvements towards the two key challenges of
safety and factual grounding.
OPT: In [86], Zhang et al. presented Open Pre-trained
Transformers (OPT), a suite of decoder-only pre-trained trans-
formers ranging from 125M to 175B parameters, which they