Fig. 24: Timeline of some of the most representative LLM frameworks (so far). In addition to large language models with our
#parameters threshold, we included a few representative works, which pushed the limits of language models, and paved the way
for their success (e.g. vanilla Transformer, BERT, GPT-1), as well as some small language models. ♣ shows entities that serve
not only as models but also as approaches. ♦ shows only approaches.
the decoder has a third sub-layer, which performs multi-head
attention over the output of the encoder stack. The attention
function can be described as mapping a query and a set of key-
value pairs to an output, where the query, keys, values, and
output are all vectors. The output is computed as a weighted
sum of the values, where the weight assigned to each value
is computed by a compatibility function of the query with the
corresponding key. Instead of performing a single attention
function with dmodel dimensional keys, values and queries,
it is found to be beneficial to linearly project the queries,
keys and values h with different, learned linear projections to
dk, dk and dv dimensions, respectively. Positional encoding is
incorporated to fuse information about the relative or absolute
position of the tokens in the sequence.
2) Encoder-Only: For this family, at each stage, the atten-
tion layers can access all the words in the initial sentence.
The pre-training of these models usually consist of some-
how corrupting a given sentence (for instance, by masking
random words in it) and tasking the model with finding or
reconstructing the initial sentence. Encoder models are great
for tasks requiring an understanding of the full sequence,
such as sentence classification, named entity recognition, and
extractive question answering. One prominent encoder only
model is BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers), proposed in [24].
3) Decoder-Only: For these models, at each stage, for any
word, the attention layers can only access the words positioned
before that in the sentence. These models are also sometimes
called auto-regressive models. The pretraining of these models
is usually formulated as predicting the next word (or token)
in the sequence. The decoder-only models are best suited for
tasks involving text generation. GPT models are prominent
example of this model category.
4) Encoder-Decoder: These models use both encoder and
decoder, and are sometimes called sequence-to-sequence mod-
els. At each stage, the attention layers of the encoder can access
all the words in the initial sentence, whereas the attention
layers of the decoder only accesses the words positioned before
a given word in the input. These models are usually pre-
trained using the objectives of encoder or decoder models, but
usually involve something a bit more complex. For instance,
some models are pretrained by replacing random spans of text
(that can contain several words) with a single mask special
word, and the objective is then to predict the text that this
mask word replaces. Encoder-decoder models are best suited
for tasks about generating new sentences conditioned on a
given input, such as summarization, translation, or generative
question answering.
B. Data Cleaning
Data quality is crucial to the performance of language
models trained on them. Data cleaning techniques such as
filtering, deduplication, are shown to have a big impact on
the model performance.
As an example, in Falcon40B [124], Penedo et al. showed
that properly filtered and deduplicated web data alone can lead
to powerful models; even significantly outperforming models
from the state-of-the-art trained on The Pile. Despite extensive
filtering, they were able to obtain five trillion tokens from