popular approach along this line, in which they introduced a
framework for improving the instruction-following capabilities
of pre-trained language models by bootstrapping their own
generations. Their pipeline generates instructions, input, and
output samples from a language model, then filters invalid or
similar ones before using them to fine tune the original model.
G. Alignment
AI Alignment is the process of steering AI systems towards
human goals, preferences, and principles. LLMs, pre-trained
for word prediction, often exhibit unintended behaviors. For
example, they might generate contents that are toxic, harmful,
misleading and biased.
Instruction tuning, discussed above, gets LLMs a step
closer to being aligned. However, in many cases, it is important
to include further steps to improve the alignment of the model
and avoid unintended behaviors 3. We review the most popular
approaches to alignment in this subsection.
RLHF (reinforcement learning from human feedback) and
RLAIF (reinforcement learning from AI feedback) are two
popular approaches. RLHF uses a reward model to learn
alignment from human feedback. This reward model, after
being tuned, is able to rate different outputs and score them
according to their alignment preferences given by humans. The
reward model gives feedback to the original LLM and this
feedback is used to tune the LLM further [137]. Reinforcement
learning from AI feedback on the other hand, directly connects
a pretrained and well-aligned model to the LLM and helps it
to learn from larger and more aligned models [138].
In another recent work (known as DPO) [139], Rafailov
et al. discussed that RLHF is a complex and often unstable
procedure, and tried to address this with a new approach. They
leveraged a mapping between reward functions and optimal
policies to show that this constrained reward maximization
problem can be optimized exactly with a single stage of policy
training, essentially solving a classification problem on the
human preference data. The resulting algorithm, which they
called Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), is stable, per-
formant, and computationally lightweight, eliminating the need
for fitting a reward model, sampling from the LM during fine-
tuning, or performing significant hyperparameter tuning. They
observed that fine-tuning with DPO exceeds RLHF’s ability to
control sentiment of generations and improves response quality
in summarization. Fig 30 shows the high-level comparison
between DPO vs RLHF.
Even more recently Ethayarajh et al. proposed a new align-
ment approach called the Kahneman-Tversky Optimization
(KTO) [136]. Unlike existing state-of-the-art approaches, KTO
does not require paired preference data ( x, yw, yl), and it
only needs (x,y) and knowledge of whether y is desirable or
undesirable. KTO-aligned models are shown to be good or
better than DPO-aligned models at scales from 1B to 30B,
despite not using paired preferences. KTO is also far easier to
use in the real world than preference optimization methods, as
the kind of data it needs is far more abundant. As an example,
3According to very recent research by Ethayarajh et al. [136], further
alignment besides SFT mainly improves models of at least 7B parameters.
For smaller models, SFT is sufficient.
Fig. 30: DPO optimizes for human preferences while avoiding
reinforcement learning. Existing methods for fine-tuning lan-
guage models with human feedback first fit a reward model
to a dataset of prompts and human preferences over pairs of
responses, and then use RL to find a policy that maximizes
the learned reward. In contrast, DPO directly optimizes for
the policy best satisfying the preferences with a simple classi-
fication objective, without an explicit reward function or RL.
Courtesy of [139].
every retail company has a lot of customer interaction data and
whether that interaction was successful (e.g., purchase made)
or unsuccessful (e.g., no purchase made). However, they have
little to no counterfactual data (i.e., what would have made
an unsuccessful customer interaction yl into a successful one
yw). Fig 31 shows a high-level comparison between KTO and
other alignment approaches discussed above.
Fig. 31: LLM alignment involves supervised finetuning fol-
lowed by optimizing a human-centered loss (HALO). How-
ever, the paired preferences that existing approaches need are
hard-to-obtain. In contrast, KTO uses a far more abundant
kind of data, making it much easier to use in the real world.
Courtesy of [136].
H. Decoding Strategies
Decoding refers to the process of text generation using pre-
trained LLMs. Given an input prompt, the tokenizer translates
each token in the input text into a corresponding token ID.
Then, the language model uses these token IDs as input and
predicts the next most likely token (or a sequence of tokens).
Finally, the model generates logits, which are converted to
probabilities using a softmax function. Different decoding
strategies have been proposed. Some of the most popular ones
are greedy search, beam search, as well as different sample
techniques such as top-K, top-P (Nucleus sampling).
1) Greedy Search: Greedy search takes the most probable
token at each step as the next token in the sequence, discarding
all other potential options. As you can imagine, this is a simple
approach and can loose a lot of temporal consistency and
coherency. It only considers the most probable token at each