Fig. 39: HuggingGPT: An agent-based approach to use tools and planning [image courtesy of [171]]
Fig. 40: A LLM-based agent for conversational information
seeking. Courtesy of [36].
The evaluation of LLMs poses particular challenges due
to the evolving landscape of their applications. The original
intent behind developing LLMs was to boost the performance
of NLP tasks such as translation, summarization, question-
answering, and so on [178]. However, it is evident today
that these models are finding utility across diverse domains
including code generation and finance. Moreover, the eval-
uation of LLMs encompasses several critical considerations
such as fairness and bias, fact-checking, and reasoning. In
this section, we outline the commonly used benchmarks for
assessing LLMs. These benchmarks are categorized based on
training or evaluating the LLM Capabilities.
A. Datasets for Basic Tasks: language model-
ing/understanding/generation
This section provides an overview of the benchmarks and
datasets suited to evaluate the basic abilities of LLMs.
• Natural Questions [179] is a QA dataset that consists
of real anonymized, aggregated queries submitted to
the Google search engine as questions. An annotator
is presented with a question along with a Wikipedia
page from the top 5 search results, and annotates a
long answer (typically a paragraph) and a short answer
(one or more entities) if present on the page, or marks
null if no long/short answer is present.
• MMLU [180] is intended to evaluate the knowl-
edge gained in zero-shot and few-shot scenarios. That
means that MMLU assesses both the general knowl-
edge and problem-solving ability of a model. It covers
57 subjects in STEM, humanities, social sciences,
and other areas. The benchmark varies in complexity,
ranging from elementary to advanced professional.
It is worth mentioning that the main contribution of
this dataset is for multi-task language understanding,
question answering, and arithmetic reasoning.
• MBPP [181] stands for “Mostly Basic Python Prob-
lems” and provides a benchmark for evaluating the
performance of models designed for code generation.
The benchmark encompasses 974 short Python pro-
grams including a wide range of topics, including
fundamental programming concepts and standard li-
brary usage, and more. Each challenge comprises a
task description, a code solution, and three automated
test cases.
• HumanEval [182] is a dataset for code generation
task. This dataset consists of 164 hand-crafted pro-
gramming challenges. Each challenge is accompanied
by a function signature, docstring, code body, and mul-
tiple unit tests. The main intuition behind developing
this dataset is to guarantee the exclusion of its contents
from training datasets for code generation models.
• APPS [183] is designed for code generation task
focusing on the Python programming language. The
APPS dataset contains a collection of 232, 444 Python
programs. Each program in the dataset has an average
of 18 lines of Python code. Additionally, APPS offers
access to a repository of 10, 000 unique programming