Large language models in some cases are hallucinating an-
swers simply because they are next-token prediction machines.
Hallucination is one of the important factors in measuring
how much a large language model is trustworthy and reliable.
Measuring hallucination on the other hand is also not easy as it
seems because each fact can be written in different styles and
even the smallest changes in writing make it hard to detect.
It is fair to assume if any particular LLM is more capable
to detect hallucination of false information in text, it is also
more trustworthy. HaluEval is one of the datasets that aims to
measure hallucination in this field [205]. Evaluation can also be
performed by another model judging the response with regard
to the actual answer [206]. Table X shows the evaluation of
different models based on these datasets.
VII. C HALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
As we have seen in the previous sections, large language
models have achieved impressive results in the past 1-2 years.
At the same time this is still a new and extremely active
research area where the pace of innovation is increasing rather
than slowing down. As in any other evolving area though, there
are still numerous challenges ahead. Here we briefly mention
some of the challenges and main active areas which are known
so far. It is worth noting that LLM challenges are discussed
in details in a work by Kaddour et al. [207].
A. Smaller and more efficient Language Models
This is a survey on large language models, and there
has been an initial push towards ”larger is better” that has
clearly been rewarded with ever larger models like GPT-
4 getting better accuracy and performance in benchmarks.
However, those large models are costly and inefficient in
several dimensions (e.g. high latency). In response to all of
this, there is a current research trend to come up with Small
Language Models (SLMs) as a cost-effective alternative to
LLMs, particularly when used on specific tasks that might not
require the full generality of larger models. Prominent works
in this direction include Phi-1 [208], Phi-1.5 [209], and Phi-2
from Microsoft.
More generally, we should expect many research efforts in
this area of how to train smaller and more efficient models.
Techniques such as parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT),
teacher/student, and other forms of distillation – see section
III-I – will continue to be used to build a smaller model out
of larger ones.
B. New Post-attention Architectural Paradigms
Transformer blocks have been a crucial and constant part of
most of current LLM frameworks, and it’s a big question mark
how much longer this architecture will be in vogue, and what
will be the next big architectural break-through in the field of
deep learning (and NLP). Since AlexNet in 2012, we have seen
many architectures go in and out of fashion, including LSTM,
GRU, seq2seq, but Transformers have been the dominant
approach since its inception. As described earlier, attention is
the main mechanism driving transformers. More recently, there
has been promising research in alternative approaches that are
being labelled as post-attention.
An important class of such class of post-attention models
are the so called State Space Models (SSMs). While the notion
of State Space Models has a long history in machine learning,
it should be noted that in the context of language models, SSM
is usually used in reference to the newer Structure State Space
Model architecture or S4 for short (see Gu et al. [29]). Some
recent models in this category are Mamba [30], Hyena [210],
and Striped Hyena [211].
While all of those models are very competitive in terms of
performance in leaderboards and efficiency, they also address
an important challenge in more traditional attention-based
architectures: the lack of support for larger context windows .
Having a good answer to many prompts requires context.
For example, the response to ”Recommend some good movies
for me” requires a lot of context about ”me” as well as what
movies are available and which ones I have not watched.
Context length is especially important for RAG, where large
portions of text might be retrieved and injected into the prompt
for generation (see section IV-C.
The longer the context length, the more tokens we can
squeeze into the context. The more information the model has
access to, the better its response will be. But on the other
hand, with very long context, it would be hard for the model
to remember everything and efficiently process all the informa-
tion. Attention-based models are highly inefficient for longer
contexts and that is why we should expect more research in
different mechanisms that enable processing longer contexts
and generally come up with more efficient architectures.
That being said, new architectures might not only propose
alternatives for the attention mechanism but rather rethink the
whole Transformer architecture. As an early example of this,
Monarch Mixer [212] proposes a new architecture that uses
the same sub-quadratic primitive that achieves high hardware
efficiency on GPUs – Monarch matrices – along both sequence
length and model dimension.
On the other end of the spectrum, it is worth mentioning
that there are some attention-compatible architectural mecha-
nisms that have been recently gaining steam and proving their
value in creating better and more powerful LLMs. Probably
the best example of such mechanism is Mixture of Experts
(MoE). MoEs have been around in machine learning for years,
even before the Deep Learning Era [213], but they have been
gaining popularity since then, and particularly in the context
of Transformer models and LLMs.
In LLMs, MoEs allow to train an extremely large model
than is then only partially instantiated during inference
when some of the experts are turned off wherever the gat-
ing/weighting function has a low weight assigned to them. As
an example, the GLaM model has 1.2 trillion parameters, but
during inference only 2 out of the 64 experts are used [84].
MoEs are nowadays an important component of the so-
called frontier LLMs (i.e. the most advanced and capable
models). GPT-4 itself is rumored to be based on a MoE
architecture, and some of the best performing LLMs such as
Mixtral [117], are basically an MoE version of pre-existing
LLMs.
Finally, it is important to note that MoEs can be used as a
component of any architecture regardless of whether it is based